Achieving competitive advantage in academia

through early career coauthorship with top scientists

Weihua Li,1, 2 Tomaso Aste,1, 2 Fabio Caccioli,1, 2, 3 and Giacomo Livan1, 2, ∗

1Department of Computer Science, University College London, 66-72 Gower Street, London WC1E 6EA, UK

2Systemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics and Political Sciences, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK

3London Mathematical Laboratory, 8 Margravine Gardens, London WC 8RH, UK

We quantify the long term impact that the coauthorship with established top-cited scientists has

on the career of junior researchers in four diﬀerent scientiﬁc disciplines.

Through matched pair


## analysis, we ﬁnd that junior researchers who coauthor work with top scientists enjoy a persistent


competitive advantage throughout the rest of their careers with respect to peers with similar early

career proﬁles.

Such a competitive advantage materialises as a higher probability of repeatedly

coauthoring work with top-cited scientists, and, ultimately, as a higher probability of becoming one.

Notably, we ﬁnd that the coauthorship with a top scientist has the strongest impact on the careers

of junior researchers aﬃliated with less prestigious institutions. As a consequence, we argue that

such institutions may hold vast amounts of untapped potential, which may be realised by improving

access to top scientists.

arXiv:1906.04619v1  [physics.soc-ph]  11 Jun 2019

I.


## INTRODUCTION


The availability of data about published research has led academia to increasingly study itself over the last few

years. Ranging from the impact of publications [1, 2] to grant attribution and staﬀhiring [3, 4], all aspects of academic

research and academic life are now studied quantitatively, as testiﬁed by the rise of the so called “Science of Science”

[5, 6].

Within this space, a number of studies have recently focused on scientiﬁc / academic impact [7, 8]. This, of course,

requires an operational deﬁnition of impact.

Although academic impact is a complex and multifaceted concept,

nowadays it is increasingly equated to a scientist’s ability to attract large numbers of citations. This, in turn, is mainly

due to the fact that citations are reliably and consistently recorded across several disciplines, and, most importantly,

to the fact that citation-based bibliometrics indicators are often used as metrics to rank scholars and determine their

career advancements [9]. For these reasons, the vast majority of studies in the literature use citation-based metrics

as a proxy for academic impact [5].

A relevant theme within the devoted literature is that of identifying early indicators of long-lasting academic impact

and their manifestation in a junior researcher’s career (see, e.g., [5, 10]). This is a notoriously challenging task, since

the aspects of a researcher’s career which are easy to quantify do not necessarily yield a large predictive power.

Indeed, the productivity of most scientists ﬂuctuates heavily over time [11, 12]. Moreover, the unpredictability of the

occurrence of a scientist’s “greatest hits” over their career trajectory [8] complicates the matter even further.

Due to such challenges, a number of studies in recent years took a diﬀerent approach by seeking to predict academic

impact based on the visibility of a junior researcher [13, 14]. Quantifying visibility presents its own challenges, as

it encompasses a number of semi-qualitative aspects that contribute to provide a junior researcher’s output with a

competitive advantage with respect to output of the same quality published by peers with similar academic status

and seniority. Factors that contribute to the visibility of a junior researcher are the following: (i) the journals where

her research is published [15, 16], (ii) the prestige of the institutions she and her coauthors are aﬃliated with [17], and

(iii) the reputation of her more established coauthors [18] and, more generally, her academic social network [19, 20].

The ﬁrst two factors are somewhat easier to measure, thanks to the availability of multiple indices aimed at ranking

journals (e.g., the impact factor [21]) and institutions [22]. This, in turn, translates into quantitative assessments of

the long-term impact that such factors have on an academic career. For example, it has been shown that the academic

prestige of the institution(s) a junior researcher is aﬃliated with correlates positively with long-term impact, as it

leads to higher productivity [23] and a higher probability of securing a tenured position and, more generally, of ending

up in a more inﬂuential position within a discipline [3, 24].

The third factor, i.e., the “social factor” that contributes to a researcher’s visibility, is much harder to quantify,

especially in the case of junior researchers, whose academic social network is still relatively sparse compared to that of

∗Electronic address: g.livan@ucl.ac.uk



2

established scientists. A number of studies have circumvented this problem by restricting a junior researcher’s social

network to her mentors and supervisors, showing in general that the supervision of an impactful mentor has beneﬁcial

eﬀects on a prot´eg´e’s academic career [25, 26]. In a similar spirit, a recent paper has revealed a “chaperone eﬀect” [27]

in scientiﬁc publishing, showing that publishing in high-impact venues as a senior author is exceedingly more likely

for scientists who have already done so in the past as junior researchers.

The above body of work suggests that the protracted interaction between a junior researcher and a well established

senior collaborator has long-lasting positive eﬀects. In this paper, we take the above body of literature to its extreme

consequences, and ask whether single events of interaction with top scientists can have career-altering eﬀects on a

junior researcher’s future.

Our main claim is that the mere coauthorship with a top scientist leads to a lasting

competitive advantage in terms of impact. We demonstrate this by means of a matched pair experimental design,

splitting a large pool of authors with long-lived academic careers into two groups - those who coauthored at least one

paper with a top-cited scientist early on in their career and those who did not. We show that - all other things being

equal - junior researchers belonging to the former group enjoy a persistent competitive advantage with respect to

their peers belonging to the latter, which ultimately gives them a much better chance of becoming top-cited scientists

themselves.

In the following, we show the presence of such a competitive advantage for junior researchers across four diﬀerent

scientiﬁc disciplines, and we demonstrate the robustness of this ﬁnding after controlling for a number of potential

confounding factors. Finally, we also show that this result yields signiﬁcant predictive power, as it can be exploited to

improve the predictability of a junior researcher’s long term academic impact based on their early career indicators.

II.


## RESULTS


Let us begin by introducing the operational deﬁnition of top scientist that we shall retain throughout the rest of

the paper. We say that a researcher is a top scientist in a given year if she belongs to the top 5% of cited authors

in her discipline for that same year. Let us remark right away that in more than 95% of cases in our dataset, once a

researcher becomes a top scientist she remains one until the end of her career.

We begin our analysis by pooling together all researchers from four disciplines (Cell Biology, Chemistry, Physics,

and Neuroscience - see Appendix A and Appendix C for the lists of journals we consider for each discipline) whose

career started between 1980 and 1998 and lasted at least 20 years, who have at least 10 publications, and who have

published at least one paper every ﬁve years. In total, we have 22, 601 such researchers (see Table I for a detailed

breakdown in terms of disciplines). Within such pool of authors with long-lived careers, the unconditional probability

of being a top scientist in the 20th career year is 24.8%. Let us now proceed to condition this probability based on the

institutional prestige a junior researcher is embedded in. We measure this by means of the average adjusted Nature

Index (see Appendix B) of the researcher’s institution and of the institutions her coauthors are aﬃliated with.

In Fig. 1 (left panel) we report the number of junior researchers falling within each quintile of the institutional

prestige distribution, divided into three groups: those who did not coauthor a paper with a top-cited scientist early

in their career (blue), those who coauthored papers with one top-cited scientist (orange), and those who coauthored

papers with more than one top-cited scientist (red). In Fig. 1 (right panel) we show the probability for authors

belonging to such groups of being a top-cited scientist themselves in their 20th career year.

The left panel reveals, as one would intuitively expect, a positive correlation between institutional prestige and

coauthorsip with top scientists. The right panel, in turn, shows a positive correlation between institutional prestige

and the probability of becoming a top-cited scientist in the long run. Yet, regardless of the relative position in terms

of institutional prestige, such probability is signiﬁcantly higher for researchers who coauthored papers with one top

scientist, and markedly higher for those who did so with more than one top scientist.

Furthermore, the right panel shows that, on average, the probability of becoming a top-cited scientist is below

the aforementioned unconditional one (grey shaded area) for almost the entire pool of junior researchers lacking

a top coauthor in their early career, with only those in the top quintile of institutional prestige managing to do

better. Conversely, junior researchers who publish with top-cited scientists are in the opposite situation, and achieve

better-than-average impact regardless of their position in terms of institutional prestige.

We now proceed to expand this analysis by assessing how excellence in diﬀerent aspects of academia relates with

long term impact by splitting all junior researchers in our pool into 8 mutually exclusive groups based on early

career performance according to diﬀerent indicators. Namely, we consider institutional prestige (I), productivity (P),

measured by the number of papers published within the ﬁrst 3 career years, and the citations received within the

ﬁrst 3 career years (C). We group junior researchers depending on whether they belong to the top 10% of authors

across such dimensions[32]. For example, we label as I the group of researchers belonging to the top 10% in terms of

institutional prestige, as IP (IC) the group of researchers belonging to the top 10% in both institutional prestige and

productivity (citations), and as IPC the group of authors belonging to the top 10% of all three dimensions.



3

A

B

104

0.6

Early Top Coauthors

Multiple

Single

None

Prob. Top Author

0.4

No. Authors

103

0.2

102

0.0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles of Institutional Prestige

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles of Institutional Prestige

FIG. 1: Relationship between early career institutional prestige and probability of becoming a top scientist. A

Number of junior researchers in each quintile of the distribution of institutional prestige. B Probability of being a top scientist

in the 20th career year as a function of institutional prestige (ribbon bands denote 95% conﬁdence intervals). In both panels

authors are grouped based on whether in their ﬁrst 3 career years they coauthored papers with one (orange), multiple (red) or

no (blue) top scientists. The grey shaded area in panel B represents the unconditional probability of becoming a top scientist

for the entire pool of junior researchers.

The top panel in Fig. 2 shows, for each category, the number of junior researchers in our dataset who coauthored

at least one paper with a top-cited scientist vs. those who did not. As it can be seen, the only group where the

latter are the clear majority is the one of researchers who do not belong to the top 10% of any category. In all other

cases, there is either a balance or a majority of junior researchers who coauthored with a top scientist, highlighting

the presence of an overall positive correlation between coauthorship with top scientists and early career performance

across all the dimensions we consider.

The middle panel shows the probability of becoming a top-cited scientist for authors belonging to each of the above

categories. Overall, independently of coauthorship with top scientists, we ﬁnd this probability to be progressively

higher as we consider authors belonging to the top 10% of more categories, signalling a positive correlation between

early and long-run career impact. Notably, such probability is above 50% for junior researchers belonging to the

top decile of two dimensions (IP, IC, PC), and hovers above 75% for junior researchers in the top decile of all three

categories (IPC).

However, in all categories except the latter we ﬁnd the above probability to be systematically higher for the sub-

groups of junior researchers with an early career paper coauthored with a top-cited scientist, and such diﬀerences

are found to be statistically signiﬁcant by a t-test in the cases labeled as “None”, I, P, and PC. The results clearly

show that the relative increase in the probability of becoming a top scientist tends to be larger in less exclusive

groups, particularly in the group of junior researchers who do not belong to the top 10% of any of the categories

considered. Indeed, for this group the coauthorship with a top scientist almost doubles such probability, which jumps

from 15.7% to 27.2%. Large increases in such probability are also apparent for the I and P groups. At the opposite

end, coauthorship with a top scientist does not make a diﬀerence for junior researchers in the IPC group. One could

interpret this as evidence that members of the latter group are with high probability already on the pathway to long-

term career impact, regardless of their coauthors. In contrast, coauthorship with a top scientist truly has potential

career-altering consequences for junior researchers who are not in the top 10% of any of the categories we considered.

In the following, we elaborate more on the mechanics leading to such consequences.

The bottom panel in Fig. 2 shows analogous results in terms of citations received per paper published between the

4th and 20th career year. We observe similar patterns to those shown in the middle panel, i.e., we ﬁnd the sub-groups

of junior researchers who coauthor with top scientists to systematically receive more citation than their peers in all

categories. For the sake of readability, here we only show aggregate results. In Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 (Appendix D)

we show equivalent ﬁgures for each of the four disciplines we consider.

The above results begin to reveal a systematic competitive advantage for junior researchers who coauthor with a

top scientist when considered as a group, but do not yet quantify such advantage at the level of individual careers.

Figuratively speaking, this could only be measured by tracking a young researcher in two parallel careers where all



A

4

Early Top Coauthor

104

Yes

No

103

No. Authors

102

101

100

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

B

1.00

0.95

Early Top Coauthor

***

0.75

Prob. Top Author

Yes

No

0.75

0.64

0.10

**

***

0.50

***

0.25

0.00

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

C

30

Early Top Coauthor

0.07

Citations per Paper

0.09

Yes

No

**

***

0.09

20

***

***

***

10

0

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

FIG. 2: Relationship between long term impact and early career performance. A Number of junior researchers

belonging to the top 10% in various categories of early career performance (I denotes institutional prestige, P denotes produc-

tivity, C denotes citations received. All three such quantities are computed based on the ﬁrst 3 career years). B Probability

for authors belonging to each group of being a top scientist in their 20th career year. C Number of citations received per

paper published by authors belonging to each group between their 4th and 20th career year. In panels B and C we report 95%

conﬁdence intervals, and we report the p-values obtained via t-tests to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between

the sub-group of junior researchers who coauthor work with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and the sub-group of those

who do not. ∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01; ∗∗∗: p < 0.001

factors remain identical, except that in one she gets to write a paper with a top scientist and in the other she does

not. This is akin to a medical trial situation, where the eﬀectiveness of a new drug has to be assessed by forming a



5

treatment and a control group.

We follow this line of reasoning and form two such groups in order to carry out a matched pair experimental design

[28]. Namely, in each of the disciplines considered we identify pairs of junior researchers with similar early career

proﬁles in terms of institutional prestige, productivity, and impact (i.e., number of citations accrued), with the only

diﬀerence being that only one of the two has coauthored a paper with a top scientist during her ﬁrst three career

years (we shall refer to this as treatment). We then proceed to assess whether this has a detectable long-term eﬀect

by computing the average number of citations accrued between career years 4 and 20 by authors belonging to each

group, both including and excluding those received by the papers published during the ﬁrst 3 career years. In order

to discount productivity as a possible confounding factor, we also compute the average number of citations received

per paper published between career years 4 and 20. In particular, we focus on authors with low early career impact

(i.e., with no more than 10 citations received in the ﬁrst 3 career years) in order to focus on the group of junior

researchers who can beneﬁt the most from the interaction with a top scientist. Overall, there are 2,324 such authors

in Cell Biology, 5,635 in Chemistry, 5,605 in Neuroscience and 5,414 in Physics.

TABLE I: Matched pair analysis results.

Junior researchers are matched based on the institutional prestige they are

embedded in, their productivity (measured by the number of papers published) and the number of citations received during

their ﬁrst 3 career years. One researcher per pair is either assigned to the treatment group (those who coauthored at least one

paper with a top scientist) or the control group, and we compute the average of the following quantities across the two groups:

(A) Citations received in career years 1-20. (B) Citations received in career years 4-20 excluding those received by the papers

published in the ﬁrst 3 career years. (C) Citations received per paper published during career years 4-20. (D) Number of

diﬀerent top scientists (per paper published) with whom the researcher has coauthored papers in career years 4-20 (excluding

those already accounted in the ﬁrst 3 career years for the treatment group). (E) Number of times (per paper published) the

researcher has coauthored papers with a top scientist in career years from 4 to 20 (excluding those already accounted in the

ﬁrst 3 career years for the treatment group). (∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01; ∗∗∗: p < 0.001; NS: not signiﬁcant). Numbers in

brackets denote standard errors.

Cell Biology

Chemistry

Neuroscience

Physics

No. authors

2, 324

5, 635

5, 605

5, 414

No. pairs

468

1, 443

1, 602

1, 362

Treat

Control

p

Treat Control

p

Treat

Control

p

Treat

Control

p

Inst. prestige

22.40

22.24

NS 26.85

26.99

NS

10.52

10.66

NS

19.58

19.69

NS

(0.57)

(0.66)

(0.32)

(0.39)

(0.17)

(0.19)

(0.24)

(0.27)

Productivity

2.36

2.37

NS

3.09

3.13

NS

3.13

3.09

NS

3.35

3.25

NS

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.05)

Cit. (years 1-3)

4.80

4.71

NS

4.06

3.95

NS

3.95

3.92

NS

4.22

4.19

NS

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(A)

361.91

281.74

∗∗∗301.36 246.38

∗∗∗383.13

325.60

∗∗∗394.28

288.31

∗∗∗

(18.70) (15.13)

(8.49)

(7.17)

(10.68) (10.73)

(13.88)

(9.47)

(B)

315.78

247.25

∗∗∗259.68 209.86

∗∗∗314.56

273.18

∗∗

343.09

249.04

∗∗∗

(18.05) (14.62)

(8.18)

(6.80)

(9.76)

(9.95)

(13.05)

(8.92)

(C)

14.39

11.56

∗∗∗

7.61

6.67

∗∗∗

12.23

10.12

∗∗∗

10.14

8.59

∗∗∗

(0.48)

(0.44)

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.24)

(0.20)

(0.21)

(0.22)

(D)

3.61

2.72

∗∗∗

4.85

2.93

∗∗∗

3.49

2.53

∗∗∗

4.29

2.68

∗∗∗

(0.17)

(0.16)

(0.13)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.08)

(0.14)

(0.10)

(E)

5.37

4.05

∗∗

10.71

5.97

∗∗∗

6.91

4.98

∗∗∗

9.73

6.15

∗∗∗

(0.30)

(0.30)

(0.38)

(0.25)

(0.24)

(0.22)

(0.39)

(0.32)

The results of the analysis are reported in Table I. In all four disciplines, we identify several hundreds of matched

pairs of junior researchers with similar early career proﬁles, except for the presence / lack of a top coauthor. In all

disciplines we ﬁnd the treatment group of junior researchers who coauthored with a top scientist to achieve a higher

impact, regardless of the speciﬁc citation metric, and we ﬁnd the diﬀerences with respect to the control group to be

statistically signiﬁcant in all cases.

This result demonstrates the long-lasting competitive advantage associated with early career coauthorship with

top scientists. In order to understand the mechanism through which such a competitive advantage materialises, we

measure how often on average junior researchers belonging to the two above groups get to coauthor papers with

top-scientists between years 4 and 20 of their careers. The results from this analysis show that the treatment group



6

consolidates its early competitive advantage by getting more opportunities to further collaborate with top scientists

than the control group. This happens both in terms of the number of diﬀerent top coauthors (excluding those already

accounted for in the ﬁrst 3 career years for the treatment group) and the number of individual coauthorship events

with top scientists. Indeed, we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the treatment and control groups in

all disciplines, with the former outperforming the latter in terms of repeated access to top scientists.

In Table II (Appendix D) we show that within pairs the junior researcher in the treatment group is the most cited

in absolute terms (p < .001 in Chemistry, Physics, and Neuroscience, p < .01 in Cell Biology, one-tailed binomial

test), and also the one who subsequently gets to coauthor more times with top scientists (p < .001 in Chemistry,

Physics, and Neuroscience, p = 0.38 in Cell Biology, one-tailed binomial test).

Put together, the above results suggest that coauthorsip with a top scientist potentially represents a good predictor

of impact in a long-lived academic career. This is conﬁrmed by the outcomes of discipline-speciﬁc linear and logistic

regressions, where we used early career coauthorship with at least one top scientist as a binary regressor against

future impact, while controlling for institutional prestige, productivity, and impact in the ﬁrst 3 career years (see

the regression plot Fig. 3). As dependent variables, we used the number of citations accrued in the ﬁrst 20 career

years in the case of linear regressions, and a binary variable to indicate whether a junior researcher had become a top

scientist herself (i.e., among the top 5% cited scientists in her discipline) in her 20th career year in the case of logistic

regressions, respectively.

We systematically found coauthorship with a at least one top scientist to be a statistically signiﬁcant predictor of

long term future impact. Odds ratios for early collaboration with top coauthors in logistic regressions are: 1.19 for

Cell Biology, 1.15 for Chemistry, 1.14 for Neuroscience, and 1.14 for Physics.

Linear Regressions to Predict 20th Career Year

A

Significance

Cell Biology

Chemistry

Neuroscience

Physics

Positive

Institutional Prestige

Productivity

Citations

Top Coauthors

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.4

Coefficient Estimate

Logistic Regressions to Predict 20th Career Year

B

Significance

Cell Biology

Chemistry

Neuroscience

Physics

Positive

Institutional Prestige

Productivity

Citations

Top Coauthors

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5 0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5 0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5 0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Coefficient Estimate

FIG. 3: Regression analysis of long-term career impact. A Results form discipline-speciﬁc linear regressions whose depen-

dent variable is the number of citations accrued in the ﬁrst 20 career years (R2 = 0.33, 0.21, 0.18, 0.19 for Cell Biology, Chemistry,

Neuroscience, and Physics, respectively.) B Results from discipline-speciﬁc logistic regressions whose dependent variable is a

binary indicator denoting whether a junior researcher is a top scientist in her 20th career year (AUC = 0.785, 0.711, 0.726, 0.749

for Cell Biology, Chemistry, Neuroscience, and Physics, respectively). In all cases there is a statistically signiﬁcant positive

relationship between coauthorship with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and long term impact.



7

III.


## DISCUSSION


In this paper we presented a number of analyses to assess the eﬀect of early career coauthorship with established top-

cited scientists on the long term prospects of junior researchers’ academic impact. Invariably, our results highlighted

that junior researchers who get the opportunity to coauthor at least one paper with a top scientist in the ﬁrst three

years of their career achieve a persistent competitive advantage with respect to their peers who do not get such an

opportunity. Therefore, the following question becomes the crux of the matter: is such a competitive advantage a

reﬂection of a young researcher’s exceptional skills, which in turn lead her to collaborate with a top scientist, or is it

instead a direct consequence of the interaction with a top scientist?

Our results cannot provide a deﬁnitive answer to the above question for one fundamental reason, i.e., that we

cannot control for the fact that established top scientists might attract the very best students.

This acts as an

ineradicable confounding factor in our analysis. Nevertheless, our results are systematic enough to suggest that it is

the collaboration with a top scientist that creates the aforementioned competitive advantage, whose echo can still be

detected 20 years later.

Let us clarify that our results do not imply that all successful careers are launched thanks to the interaction with

a top scientist early on. In fact, the probability to become a top scientist in the long run is the highest for those

junior researchers who start their careers as the best among their peers (see Fig. 2). Nevertheless, for those junior

researchers who are not at the top among their peers in at least one category among institutional prestige, productivity

and impact, the opportunity to coauthor papers with top scientists systematically provides a competitive advantage.

Loosely speaking, top junior researchers will always tend to become top scientists, whereas others may genuinely

experience a shift in career trajectory after the interaction with a top scientist. In this respect, our work sheds light

on previously published studies on the interactions between junior and well established scientists [29, 30].

The aforementioned competitive advantage materialises by means of a “rich-get-richer” mechanism, where the early

career opportunity to coauthor papers with a top scientist translates into a higher probability of doing it again at

later career stages, and, eventually, to become one. In this respect, our results are in line with other studies that have

shown how academic achievements facilitate access to further impact and recognition [23, 31].

The present work sheds new light on the determinants of academic impact. Indeed, our results show that early career

opportunities can play an exceedingly important role in shaping the prospects of a long academic career. Loosely

speaking, we may say that being “in the right place at the right time” - and being able to seize on the opportunity

- provides a junior researcher with an early edge which may separate her from her peers for years to come. This

is highlighted very clearly by our matched pair analysis (see Table I), which shows that the interaction with a top

scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years is already enough to permanently split career trajectories that were otherwise on

the same path. We interpret this result as evidence that academic institutions are ﬁlled with untapped potential,

which may largely remain unrealised simply due to a lack of opportunity.

Seen from a diﬀerent perspective, the above considerations suggest that top scientist can make a unique diﬀerence

towards unlocking growth potential, especially for junior researchers in less prestigious institutions, who in fact are

the most positively impacted when presented with the opportunity to work with a top scientist (see Fig. 2).

[1] J. E. Hirsch, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 16569 (2005).

[2] S. Lehmann, A. D. Jackson, and B. E. Lautrup, Nature 444, 1003 (2006).

[3] A. Clauset, S. Arbesman, and D. B. Larremore, Science advances 1, e1400005 (2015).

[4] A. Clauset, D. B. Larremore, and R. Sinatra, Science 355, 477 (2017).

[5] A. Zeng, Z. Shen, J. Zhou, J. Wu, Y. Fan, Y. Wang, and H. E. Stanley, Physics Reports 714, 1 (2017).

[6] S. Fortunato, C. T. Bergstrom, K. B¨orner, J. A. Evans, D. Helbing, S. Milojevi´c, A. M. Petersen, F. Radicchi, R. Sinatra,

B. Uzzi, et al., Science 359, eaao0185 (2018).

[7] D. Wang, C. Song, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 342, 127 (2013).

[8] R. Sinatra, D. Wang, P. Deville, C. Song, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 354, aaf5239 (2016).

[9] D. Moher, F. Naudet, I. A. Cristea, F. Miedema, J. P. Ioannidis, and S. N. Goodman, PLoS biology 16, e2004089 (2018).

[10] D. E. Acuna, S. Allesina, and K. P. Kording, Nature 489, 201 (2012).

[11] A. M. Petersen, M. Riccaboni, H. E. Stanley, and F. Pammolli, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2012).

[12] S. F. Way, A. C. Morgan, A. Clauset, and D. B. Larremore, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, E9216

(2017).

[13] I. Tahamtan, A. S. Afshar, and K. Ahamdzadeh, Scientometrics 107, 1195 (2016).

[14] N. Ale Ebrahim, H. Salehi, M. A. Embi, F. Habibi, H. Gholizadeh, and S. M. Motahar, International Education Studies

7, 120 (2014).

[15] E. S. Vieira and J. A. Gomes, Journal of Informetrics 4, 1 (2010).

[16] J. Xia, R. Lynette Myers, and S. Kay Wilhoite, Journal of Information Science 37, 19 (2011).



8

[17] N. Amara, R. Landry, and N. Halilem, Scientometrics 103, 489 (2015).

[18] A. M. Petersen, S. Fortunato, R. K. Pan, K. Kaski, O. Penner, A. Rungi, M. Riccaboni, H. E. Stanley, and F. Pammolli,

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 15316 (2014).

[19] E. Sarig¨ol, R. Pﬁtzner, I. Scholtes, A. Garas, and F. Schweitzer, EPJ Data Science 3, 9 (2014).

[20] D. Contandriopoulos, A. Duhoux, C. Larouche, and M. Perroux, PloS one 11, e0161281 (2016).

[21] E. Garﬁeld, Jama 295, 90 (2006).

[22] N. C. Liu and Y. Cheng, Higher education in Europe 30, 127 (2005).

[23] S. F. Way, A. C. Morgan, D. B. Larremore, and A. Clauset, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences p. 201817431

(2019).

[24] A. G. Bedeian, D. E. Cavazos, J. G. Hunt, and L. R. Jauch, Academy of Management Learning & Education 9, 11 (2010).

[25] R. D. Malmgren, J. M. Ottino, and L. A. N. Amaral, Nature 465, 622 (2010).

[26] J. F. Lienard, T. Achakulwisut, D. E. Acuna, and S. V. David, Nature Communications p. 273888 (2018).

[27] V. Sekara, P. Deville, S. E. Ahnert, A.-L. Barab´asi, R. Sinatra, and S. Lehmann, Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 115, 12603 (2018).

[28] K. Imai, G. King, C. Nall, et al., Statistical Science 24, 29 (2009).

[29] T. Amjad, Y. Ding, J. Xu, C. Zhang, A. Daud, J. Tang, and M. Song, Journal of Informetrics 11, 307 (2017).

[30] M. Qi, A. Zeng, M. Li, Y. Fan, and Z. Di, Scientometrics 111, 1839 (2017).

[31] A. M. Petersen, W.-S. Jung, J.-S. Yang, and H. E. Stanley, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 18

(2011).

[32] Authors are compared against their peers in the same discipline who started their career in the same year.



9


## Appendix A: Data


We collected publication and citation data for four disciplines (Cell Biology, Chemistry, Neuroscience, and Physics)

indexed on the Web of Science database. For each discipline, we collected data about all papers published since 1970

in a selection of journals, their authors and their aﬃliations. The data include outputs such as letters and editorials,

but we limited our dataset to standard articles and review articles, as these are the usual outputs of research eﬀorts.

We selected journals based on two criteria: in the case of Chemistry and Physics, we selected all publications issued

by the American Physical Society (APS, 9 journals) and the American Chemical Society (ACS, 42 journals), which

represent major publishers in their respective ﬁelds. In the case of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, instead, we selected

all journals whose publications collectively accrued at least 10,000 total citations according to the Journal Citation

Reports (JCR). These amount to 53 journals in Cell Biology and 59 journals in Neuroscience, respectively. We provide

the full lists of journals in Appendix C.

We then proceeded to disambiguate the names of the authors of papers in the above venues with the methodology

published in [8], and we only retained the papers and citations belonging to authors with at least 10 citations in their

ﬁnal career year. With these positions, we retained 226,362 papers and 71,794 authors in Cell Biology, 524,639 papers

and 123,513 authors in Chemistry, 395,246 papers and 102,074 authors in Neuroscience, 412,063 papers and 80,218

authors in Physics.


## Appendix B: Institutional prestige score


We measure the institutional prestige a junior researcher is embedded in by means of the Nature Index

(https://www.natureindex.com/), which has been introduced by the Nature group in order to rank the academic

prestige of universities and research institutions. This is computed by counting the number of papers published in a

set of expert-selected journals in the above four disciplines (Cell Biology, Chemistry, Neuroscience and Physics). We

adopt the same methodology and compute a given institution i’s prestige score as

p

P nat

i

, where P nat

i

is the number

of publications authored by researchers aﬃliated with institution i in the Nature Index’s list of journals since 1970.

We then compute a paper’s prestige score as the average prestige score of its authors’ institutions, and a researcher’s

prestige score as the average prestige score of her papers.



10


## Appendix C: Lists of journals


Journals in Cell Biology

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSIOLOGY-CELL PHYSIOLOGY

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

AUTOPHAGY

BIOCHIMICA ET BIOPHYSICA ACTA-MOLECULAR CELL RESEARCH

CANCER CELL

CELL

CELL AND TISSUE RESEARCH

CELL CYCLE

CELL DEATH & DISEASE

CELL DEATH AND DIFFERENTIATION

CELL METABOLISM

CELL REPORTS

CELL RESEARCH

CELL STEM CELL

CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR LIFE SCIENCES

CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTRY

CELLULAR SIGNALLING

COLD SPRING HARBOR PERSPECTIVES IN BIOLOGY

CURRENT BIOLOGY

CURRENT OPINION IN CELL BIOLOGY

CURRENT OPINION IN STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY

DEVELOPMENTAL CELL

EMBO JOURNAL

EMBO REPORTS

EXPERIMENTAL CELL RESEARCH

FASEB JOURNAL

FEBS LETTERS

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF BIOCHEMISTRY & CELL BIOLOGY

JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY

JOURNAL OF CELL SCIENCE

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR MEDICINE

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR BIOCHEMISTRY

JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY

JOURNAL OF LEUKOCYTE BIOLOGY

JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR CARDIOLOGY

MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOCHEMISTRY

MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY

MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR ENDOCRINOLOGY

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY OF THE CELL

MOLECULAR CELL

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY

NATURE MEDICINE

NATURE REVIEWS MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

ONCOGENE

PLANT AND CELL PHYSIOLOGY

PLANT CELL CIENCE SIGNALING

SCIENCE TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE

STEM CELLS

STRUCTURE

TRENDS IN CELL BIOLOGY



11

Journals in Chemistry (published by American Chemical Society)

ACCOUNTS OF CHEMICAL RESEARCH

ACS APPLIED MATERIALS & INTERFACES

ACS BIOMATERIALS SCIENCE & ENGINEERING

ACS CATALYSIS

ACS CHEMICAL BIOLOGY

ACS CHEMICAL NEUROSCIENCE

ACS COMBINATORIAL SCIENCE

ACS INFECTIOUS DISEASES

ACS MACRO LETTERS

ACS MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY LETTERS

ACS NANO

ACS PHOTONICS

ACS SUSTAINABLE CHEMISTRY & ENGINEERING

ACS SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY

ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY

BIOCHEMISTRY

BIOCONJUGATE CHEMISTRY

BIOMACROMOLECULES

BIOTECHNOLOGY PROGRESS

CHEMICAL RESEARCH IN TOXICOLOGY

CHEMISTRY OF MATERIALS

CRYSTAL GROWTH & DESIGN

ENERGY & FUELS

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY LETTERS

INDUSTRIAL & ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY RESEARCH

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY

JOURNAL OF AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD CHEMISTRY

JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL EDUCATION

JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL INFORMATION AND MODELING

JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL THEORY AND COMPUTATION

JOURNAL OF MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY

JOURNAL OF NATURAL PRODUCTS

JOURNAL OF PROTEOME RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY

LANGMUIR

MACROMOLECULES

MOLECULAR PHARMACEUTICS

NANO LETTERS

ORGANIC LETTERS

ORGANIC PROCESS RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

ORGANOMETALLICS

Journals in Neuroscience

ACTA NEUROPATHOLOGICA

ANNALS OF NEUROLOGY

BEHAVIOURAL BRAIN RESEARCH

BIOLOGICAL PSYCHIATRY

BRAIN

BRAIN BEHAVIOR AND IMMUNITY

BRAIN RESEARCH

CEREBRAL CORTEX

CLINICAL NEUROPHYSIOLOGY

CURRENT OPINION IN NEUROBIOLOGY

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF NEUROLOGY

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF NEUROSCIENCE

EXPERIMENTAL BRAIN RESEARCH



12

EXPERIMENTAL NEUROLOGY

FRONTIERS IN HUMAN NEUROSCIENCE

GAIT & POSTURE

GLIA

HUMAN BRAIN MAPPING

JOURNAL OF ALZHEIMERS DISEASE

JOURNAL OF CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW AND METABOLISM

JOURNAL OF COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE NEUROLOGY

JOURNAL OF NEUROCHEMISTRY

JOURNAL OF NEUROIMMUNOLOGY

JOURNAL OF NEUROPHYSIOLOGY

JOURNAL OF NEUROSCIENCE

JOURNAL OF NEUROSCIENCE METHODS

JOURNAL OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF NEUROTRAUMA

JOURNAL OF PHYSIOLOGY-LONDON

JOURNAL OF THE NEUROLOGICAL SCIENCES

MOLECULAR NEUROBIOLOGY

MOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY

MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS JOURNAL

MUSCLE & NERVE

NATURE NEUROSCIENCE

NEURAL COMPUTATION

NEURAL NETWORKS

NEUROBIOLOGY OF AGING

NEUROBIOLOGY OF DISEASE

NEUROIMAGE

NEURON

NEUROPHARMACOLOGY

NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

NEUROREPORT

NEUROSCIENCE

NEUROSCIENCE AND BIOBEHAVIORAL REVIEWS

NEUROSCIENCE LETTERS

PAIN

PHARMACOLOGY BIOCHEMISTRY AND BEHAVIOR

PROGRESS IN NEUROBIOLOGY

PSYCHONEUROENDOCRINOLOGY

PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY

PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY

SLEEP

TRENDS IN COGNITIVE SCIENCES

TRENDS IN NEUROSCIENCES

VISION RESEARCH

Journals in Physics

PHYSICAL REVIEW A

PHYSICAL REVIEW ACCELERATORS AND BEAMS

PHYSICAL REVIEW APPLIED

PHYSICAL REVIEW B

PHYSICAL REVIEW C

PHYSICAL REVIEW D

PHYSICAL REVIEW E

PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS

PHYSICAL REVIEW X



13


## Appendix D: Supplementary tables and ﬁgures


TABLE II: Binomial tests for matched pairs of junior researchers.

Junior researchers are matched based on the

institutional prestige they are embedded in, the citations received and the number of papers published during their ﬁrst 3

career years. One researcher per pair is either assigned to the treatment group (those who coauthored at least one paper

with a top scientist). We compute the percentage of pairs in which the junior researcher who coauthored with a top scientist

had a better performance with respect to the following quantities (statistical signiﬁcance refers to a one-tailed binomial test):

(A) citations received in career years 1-20; (B) citations received in career years 4-20 excluding those received by the papers

published in the ﬁrst 3 career years; (C) citations received per paper published during career years 4-20; (D) number of

diﬀerent top scientists (per paper published) with whom the researcher has coauthored papers in career years 4-20 (excluding

those already accounted in the ﬁrst 3 career years for the treatment group); (E) number of times (per paper published) the

researcher has coauthored papers with a top scientist in career years from 4 to 20 (excluding those already accounted in the

ﬁrst 3 career years for the treatment group). (∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01; ∗∗∗: p < 0.001; NS: not signiﬁcant). Numbers in

brackets denote standard errors.

Cell Biology

Chemistry

Neuroscience

Physics

No. authors

2, 324

5, 635

5, 605

5, 414

No. pairs

468

1, 443

1, 602

1, 362

Top co. Control

p

Top co. Control

p

Top co. Control

p

Top co. Control

p

Inst. prestige

22.40

22.24

NS

26.85

26.99

NS

10.52

10.66

NS

19.58

19.69

NS

(0.57)

(0.66)

(0.32)

(0.39)

(0.17)

(0.19)

(0.24)

(0.27)

Productivity

2.36

2.37

NS

3.09

3.13

NS

3.13

3.09

NS

3.35

3.25

NS

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.05)

(0.05)

Cit. (years 1-3)

4.80

4.71

NS

4.06

3.95

NS

3.95

3.92

NS

4.22

4.19

NS

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.08)

(A)

57.5%

∗∗

56.3%

∗∗∗

58.4%

∗∗∗

61.2%

∗∗∗

(B)

56.6%

∗∗

56.8%

∗∗∗

57.9%

∗∗

61.4%

∗∗∗

(C)

48.1%

NS

52.3%

0.08

48.4%

NS

56.0%

∗∗∗

(D)

50.6%

NS

57.2%

∗∗∗

52.9%

∗

56.8%

∗∗∗

(E)

52.6%

NS

59.7%

∗∗∗

54.7%

∗∗∗

59.2%

∗∗∗



14

A

Early Top Coauthor

104

Yes

No

103

No. Authors

102

101

100

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

B

0.54

0.28

1.00

Early Top Coauthor

0.07

***

*

Prob. Top Author

Yes

No

0.75

***

0.50

0.25

0.00

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

C

40

0.24

Early Top Coauthor

0.26

0.94

Citations per Paper

**

Yes

No

30

*

20

***

***

10

0

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

FIG. 4: Relationship between long term impact and early career performance in Cell Biology. A Number of

junior researchers belonging to the top 10% in various categories of early career performance (I denotes institutional prestige, P

denotes productivity, C denotes citations received. All three such quantities are computed based on the ﬁrst 3 career years). B

Probability for authors belonging to each group of being a top scientist in their 20th career year. C Number of citations received

per paper published by authors belonging to each group between their 4th and 20th career year. In all panels, we report the

p-values obtained via t-tests to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between the sub-group of junior researchers who

coauthor work with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and the sub-group of those who do not. ∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01;

∗∗∗: p < 0.001



15

A

Early Top Coauthor

104

Yes

No

103

No. Authors

102

101

100

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

B

0.72

1.00

Early Top Coauthor

*

*

0.32

Prob. Top Author

Yes

No

0.75

0.32

0.46

**

0.50

***

0.25

0.00

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

C

30

Early Top Coauthor

Citations per Paper

Yes

No

0.07

20

0.49

0.82

**

0.54

0.41

***

***

10

0

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

FIG. 5: Relationship between long term impact and early career performance in Chemistry. A Number of junior

researchers belonging to the top 10% in various categories of early career performance (I denotes institutional prestige, P

denotes productivity, C denotes citations received. All three such quantities are computed based on the ﬁrst 3 career years). B

Probability for authors belonging to each group of being a top scientist in their 20th career year. C Number of citations received

per paper published by authors belonging to each group between their 4th and 20th career year. In all panels, we report the

p-values obtained via t-tests to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between the sub-group of junior researchers who

coauthor work with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and the sub-group of those who do not. ∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01;

∗∗∗: p < 0.001



A

16

Early Top Coauthor

104

Yes

No

103

No. Authors

102

101

100

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

B

1.00

Early Top Coauthor

0.29

0.05

Prob. Top Author

Yes

No

0.75

0.67

0.54

**

0.50

***

0.25

0.00

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

C

40

Early Top Coauthor

Citations per Paper

0.66

0.46

Yes

No

30

0.09

**

0.53

*

20

*

***

10

0

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

FIG. 6: Relationship between long term impact and early career performance in Neuroscience. A Number of

junior researchers belonging to the top 10% in various categories of early career performance (I denotes institutional prestige, P

denotes productivity, C denotes citations received. All three such quantities are computed based on the ﬁrst 3 career years). B

Probability for authors belonging to each group of being a top scientist in their 20th career year. C Number of citations received

per paper published by authors belonging to each group between their 4th and 20th career year. In all panels, we report the

p-values obtained via t-tests to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between the sub-group of junior researchers who

coauthor work with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and the sub-group of those who do not. ∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01;

∗∗∗: p < 0.001



A

17

Early Top Coauthor

104

Yes

No

103

No. Authors

102

101

100

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

B

0.90

0.33

1.00

Early Top Coauthor

Prob. Top Author

Yes

No

0.71

*

0.75

0.38

*

0.07

0.50

***

0.25

0.00

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

C

30

Early Top Coauthor

0.36

Citations per Paper

0.35

Yes

No

0.23

**

0.42

20

**

*

***

10

0

None

I

P

C

IP

IC

PC

IPC

Groups of Authors

FIG. 7: Relationship between long term impact and early career performance in Physics. A Number of junior

researchers belonging to the top 10% in various categories of early career performance (I denotes institutional prestige, P

denotes productivity, C denotes citations received. All three such quantities are computed based on the ﬁrst 3 career years). B

Probability for authors belonging to each group of being a top scientist in their 20th career year. C Number of citations received

per paper published by authors belonging to each group between their 4th and 20th career year. In all panels, we report the

p-values obtained via t-tests to assess the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between the sub-group of junior researchers who

coauthor work with a top scientist in the ﬁrst 3 career years and the sub-group of those who do not. ∗: p < 0.05; ∗∗: p < 0.01;

∗∗∗: p < 0.001