Contest models highlight inherent ineﬃciencies

of scientiﬁc funding competitions

Kevin Gross∗

Department of Statistics

North Carolina State University

Raleigh, NC USA

Carl T. Bergstrom†

Department of Biology

University of Washington

Seattle, WA USA

(Dated: January 4, 2019)

arXiv:1804.03732v3  [physics.soc-ph]  2 Jan 2019

Scientiﬁc research funding is allocated largely through a system of soliciting and ranking com-

petitive grant proposals. In these competitions, the proposals themselves are not the deliverables

that the funder seeks, but instead are used by the funder to screen for the most promising research

ideas. Consequently, some of the funding program’s impact on science is squandered because ap-

plying researchers must spend time writing proposals instead of doing science.

To what extent

does the community’s aggregate investment in proposal preparation negate the scientiﬁc impact of

the funding program? Are there alternative mechanisms for awarding funds that advance science

more eﬃciently? We use the economic theory of contests to analyze how eﬃciently grant proposal

competitions advance science, and compare them with recently proposed, partially randomized al-

ternatives such as lotteries. We ﬁnd that the eﬀort researchers waste in writing proposals may be

comparable to the total scientiﬁc value of the research that the funding supports, especially when

only a few proposals can be funded. Moreover, when professional pressures motivate investigators

to seek funding for reasons that extend beyond the value of the proposed science (e.g., promotion,

prestige), the entire program can actually hamper scientiﬁc progress when the number of awards is

small. We suggest that lost eﬃciency may be restored either by partial lotteries for funding, or by

funding researchers based on past scientiﬁc success instead of proposals for future work.

randomly selected to receive funds. Arguments in favor

of a partial lottery include reduced demographic and sys-

temic bias, increased transparency, and a hedge against

the impossibility of forecasting how scientiﬁc projects will

unfold [16]. Indeed, at least three funding organizations

— New Zealand’s Health Research Council and their Sci-

ence for Technological Innovation program, as well as the

Volkswagen Foundation [19] — have recently begun using

partial lotteries to fund riskier, more exploratory science.

Compared with a proposal competition, a lottery per-

mits more proposals to qualify for funding and thus low-

ers the bar that applicants must clear.

A lottery also

oﬀers a lower reward for success, as a successful proposal

receives a chance at funding, not a guarantee of funding.

Thus we expect that investigators applying to a partial

lottery will invest less time and fewer resources in writ-

ing a proposal. To a ﬁrst approximation, then, a proposal

competition funds high-value projects while wasting sub-

stantial researcher time on proposal preparation, whereas

a partial lottery would fund lower-value projects on aver-

age but would reduce the time wasted writing proposals.

It is not obvious which system will have the greater net

beneﬁt for scientiﬁc progress.

In this article, we study the merits and costs of tra-

ditional proposal competitions versus partial lotteries by

situating both within the rich economic theory of con-

tests. In this theory, competing participants make costly

investments (“bids”) in order to win one or more prizes

[20, 21].

Participants diﬀer in key attributes, such as


## INTRODUCTION


Over the past ﬁfty years, research funding in the

United States has failed to keep pace with growth in

scientiﬁc activity. Funding rates in grant competitions

have plummeted (Fig. S1, [1–4]) and researchers spend

far more time writing grant proposals than they did in

the past [5]. A large survey of top U.S. universities found

that, on average, faculty devote 8% of their total time —

and 19% of their time available for research activities

— towards preparing grant proposals [6]. Anecdotally,

medical school faculty may spend fully half their time or

more seeking grant funding [5, 7]. While the act of writ-

ing a proposal may have some intrinsic scientiﬁc value

[8] — perhaps by helping an investigator sharpen ideas

— much of the eﬀort given to writing proposals is ef-

fort taken away from doing science [9]. With respect to

scientiﬁc progress, this time is wasted [10].

Frustrated with the ineﬃciencies of the current fund-

ing system, some researchers have called for an overhaul

of the prevailing funding model [9, 11–18]. In particular,

Fang & Casadevall [16] recently suggested a partial lot-

tery, in which proposals are rated as worthy of funding

or not, and then a subset of the worthy proposals are

∗krgross@ncsu.edu

† cbergst@u.washington.edu



2

ability and opportunity cost, that determine their op-

timal strategies. In an economics context, contests are

often used by the organizer as a mechanism to elicit ef-

fort from the participants. For example, TopCoder and

Kaggle are popular contest platforms for tech ﬁrms (the

organizers) to solicit programming or data-analysis eﬀort

from freelance workers (the participants). However, be-

cause the participants’ attributes inﬂuence their optimal

strategies, the bids that participants submit reveal those

attributes. Thus, screening of participants often arises as

a side eﬀect.

In funding competitions, the organizer is a funding

body and the participants are competing investigators.

Investigators pitch project ideas of varying scientiﬁc

value by preparing costly proposals.

However, unlike

a traditional economic contest, the funding body’s pri-

mary objective is to identify the most promising science,

using proposals to screen for high-value ideas. The fund-

ing body has little interest in eliciting work during the

competition itself, as the proposals are not the deliver-

ables the funder seeks. All else equal, the funding agency

would prefer to minimize the work that goes into prepar-

ing proposals, to leave as much time as possible for in-

vestigators to do science. In this case, how should the

funder organize the contest to support promising science

without squandering much of the program’s beneﬁt on

time wasted writing proposals?

Below, we pursue this question by presenting and ana-

lyzing a contest model for scientiﬁc funding competitions.

We ﬁrst use the model to assess the eﬃciency of proposal

competitions for promoting scientiﬁc progress, and ask

how that eﬃciency depends on how many proposals are

funded. We next explore how eﬃciency is impacted when

extra-scientiﬁc incentives such as professional advance-

ment motivate scientists to pursue funding, and compare

the eﬃciency of proposal competitions versus partial lot-

teries. Finally, we reﬂect on alternative ways to improve

the eﬃciency of funding competitions without adding in-

tentional randomness to the award process. All of our

analyses focus on equilibrium behavior, and thus per-

tain most directly to long-standing funding competitions

for which researchers can acquire experience that informs

their future actions.

bines the abilities of the investigator and the promise of

the idea itself. Although we do not assign speciﬁc units

to v, scientiﬁc value can be thought of as some measure of

scientiﬁc progress, such as the expected number of pub-

lications or discoveries. We assume that the funder seeks

to advance science by maximizing the scientiﬁc value of

the projects that it funds, minus the value of the science

that investigators forgo while writing proposals. How-

ever, the funder cannot observe the value of a project

idea directly. Instead the funder evaluates proposals for

research projects, and awards grants to the top-ranked

proposals.

Assume that proposals can be prepared to

diﬀerent strengths, denoted x ≥0, with a larger value of

x corresponding to a stronger proposal. A scientist with

a project idea of value v must decide how much eﬀort

to invest in writing a proposal, that is, to what strength

x her proposal should be prepared. In our model, this

decision is made by a cost-beneﬁt optimization.

On the beneﬁt side, if a proposal is funded, the inves-

tigator receives a reward equal to the scientiﬁc value of

the project, or v. This reward is public, in the sense that

it beneﬁts both the investigator and the funder. Receiv-

ing a grant may also bestow an extra-scientiﬁc reward on

the recipient, such as prestige, promotion, or professional

acclaim.

Write this extra-scientiﬁc reward as v0 ≥0.

This extra-scientiﬁc reward is private, as it beneﬁts only

the grant recipient, and not the funder.

Let η(x) be

the equilibrium probability that a proposal of strength

x is funded; η(x) will be a non-decreasing function of x.

Thus, in expectation, an investigator with a project of

value v who prepares a proposal of strength x receives a

beneﬁt of (v0 + v)η(x).

Preparing a grant proposal also entails a disutility cost,

equal to the value of the science that the investigator

could have produced with the time and resources invested

in writing. Let c(v, x) give the disutility cost of preparing

a proposal of strength x for a project of value v. Here,

we study the case where c(v, x) is a separable function of

v and x, so we set c(v, x) = g(v)h(x). Proposal compe-

titions are eﬀective screening devices because it is easier

to write a strong proposal about a good idea than about

a poor one. Therefore, g(v) is a decreasing function of

v, i.e., g′(v) < 0. For a given idea, it takes more work

to write a stronger proposal, and thus h′(x) > 0. Fi-

nally, we assume that preparing a zero-strength proposal

is tantamount to opting out of the competition, which

can be done at zero cost. Thus h(0) = 0.

Preparing a proposal has some scientiﬁc value of its

own through the sharpening of ideas that writing a pro-

posal demands [8]. Let k ∈[0, 1) be the proportion of

the disutility cost c(v, x) that an investigator recoups by

honing her ideas. We call the recouped portion of the

disutility cost the intrinsic scientiﬁc value of writing a

proposal. The portion of the disutility cost that cannot

be recouped is scientiﬁc waste.

All told, the total beneﬁt to the investigator of prepar-

ing a proposal to strength x is (v0 + v)η(x) + kc(v, x),

and the total cost is c(v, x). The diﬀerence between the

A CONTEST MODEL FOR SCIENTIFIC

FUNDING COMPETITIONS

Our model draws upon a framework for contests de-

veloped by Moldovanu & Sela [20]. In our application,

a large number of scientists (or research teams) compete

for grants to be awarded by a funding body. The funder

can fund a proportion p of the competing investigators.

We call p the payline, although p could be smaller than

the proportion of investigators who are funded if some

investigators do not enter the competition.

Project ideas vary in their scientiﬁc value, which we

write as v, where v ≥0. In this case, scientiﬁc value com-



3

beneﬁt and the cost is the investigator’s payoﬀ. The in-

vestigator’s optimal proposal (or, in economic terms, her

“bid”) maximizes this payoﬀ(Fig. 1):

competition (that is, her competitors’ types, v), but she

can be certain that the strongest bid will win the top

prize. In our case, we assume that the applicant pool is

large enough that the strength of the competition (i.e.,

the distribution of v among the applicants) is predictable.

However, the funding agency does not observe x directly,

but instead convenes a review panel to assess each pro-

posal’s strength. Variability among reviewers’ opinions

then introduces an element of chance into which propos-

als get funded.

b(v) = arg max

x

{(v0 + v)η(x) −(1 −k)c(v, x)} .

(1)

For simplicity, we assume that variation among projects

is captured entirely in the distribution of v, which we

write as F(v). We assume that v0 and k have common

values shared by all investigators. In the appendix we

show that our results extend to cases where v0 or k vary

among investigators, as long as they are perfectly corre-

lated with v.

Scientiﬁc eﬃciency

We use the model to explore how eﬃciently the grant

competition advances science. From the perspective of

an individual investigator, the investigator’s return on

her investment (ROI) is the ratio of her payoﬀto the

cost of her bid:

2.0

1.5

Benefit or cost

1.0

0.5

Investigator’s ROI = (v0 + v)η(b(v)) −(1 −k)c(v, b(v))

Benefit

Cost

c(v, b(v))

.

0.0

(3)

An investigator will never choose to write a proposal that

generates a negative payoﬀ, because she can always ob-

tain a payoﬀof 0 by opting out. (If the investigator opts

out, eq. 3 evaluates to 0/0, in which case we deﬁne her

ROI to be 0.) Thus, an investigator’s equilibrium ROI

must be ≥0.

To analyze the funding program’s impact on scientiﬁc

progress as a whole, we compare the total value of the

science that the funding program supports with the total

value of the science that has been squandered preparing

proposals.

Of course, both of these quantities will be

confounded with the number of grants that are funded,

so we standardize to a per-funded-proposal basis. In no-

tation, the average scientiﬁc value per funded proposal

is

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Strength of grant proposal (x)

FIG. 1. An investigator prepares her grant proposal

to the strength that maximizes her payoﬀ. The blue

curve shows the expected beneﬁt to the investigator, which

is determined by the project’s value, any extra-scientiﬁc re-

ward that the investigator receives from getting the grant,

the probability of receiving funding, and the intrinsic value of

writing a proposal. The red curve shows the disutility cost of

preparing a proposal. The investigator’s payoﬀis the diﬀer-

ence between the beneﬁt and the cost. The vertical line shows

the bid (eq. 1) — the proposal strength that maximizes the

payoﬀ. At the bid, the ratio of the payoﬀ(given by the length

of the solid vertical line) to the cost (given by the length of

the dashed vertical line) gives the investigator’s return on her

investment.

1

p

Z

vη(b(v)) dF(v),

(4)

The challenge in ﬁnding the payoﬀ-maximizing bid b(v)

is that the equilibrium probability of funding, η(x), must

be determined endogeneously, in a way that is consistent

with both the payline p and the distribution of bids that

investigators submit. In Appendix S1, we follow Hoppe

et al. [22] to show that, at equilibrium, the bid function

is given by

and the average scientiﬁc waste per funded proposal is

1

p

Z

(1 −k)c(v, b(v)) dF(v).

(5)

We will refer to the diﬀerence between these two quanti-

ties as the scientiﬁc gain (or loss, should it be negative)

per funded proposal, which is our measure of the funding

program’s scientiﬁc eﬃciency.

Note that while an investigator will never enter a grant

competition against her own self interest, there is no

guarantee that the scientiﬁc value per funded proposal

will exceed the scientiﬁc waste. This is because the inves-

tigator’s payoﬀincludes private, extra-scientiﬁc rewards

obtained by winning a grant (v0), and (in our account-

ing, at least) these extra-scientiﬁc rewards do not beneﬁt

the funding agency.

If extra-scientiﬁc motivations for

winning grants are large enough, investigators may enter

Z v

b(v) = h−1



1

1 −k

g(t) ξ′(t) dt



.

(2)

v0 + t

0

In eq. 2, ξ(v) = η(b(v)) is the equilibrium probability

that an idea of value v is funded. The particular form

of ξ(v) depends on how much randomness is introduced

during the review process, which we discuss below.

By comparison, Moldovanu & Sela [20] considered a

contest with a small number of competitors, in which

the contest’s judges observe x directly. In their set-up,

each contestant is uncertain about the strength of her



4

assume that η(x) depends on x only through its rank. In


## Appendix S1, we show how a copula leads to an equation


for ξ′(v), which can then be plugged in to eq. 2.

Fig. 2 shows numerical results for the baseline param-

eters at generous (p = 45%) and low (p = 15%) paylines.

In this particular case, investigators’ payoﬀs fall faster

than costs as paylines drop, leading to a reduced ROI

for everyone at the lower payline (Fig. 2B). We will ar-

gue below that every investigator’s ROI must inevitably

fall when the payline becomes small (see Figs. S3–S4 for

additional examples).

a grant competition even when doing so decreases their

scientiﬁc productivity. If enough investigators are moti-

vated accordingly, then the scientiﬁc progress sacriﬁced

to writing proposals could exceed the scientiﬁc value of

the funding program. In this case, the grant competi-

tion would operate at a loss to science, and the fund-

ing agency could do more for science by eschewing the

proposal competition and spreading the money evenly

among active researchers in the ﬁeld, or by giving the

money to researchers selected entirely at random.


## ANALYSIS AND NUMERICAL RESULTS


1.0

200%

B

A

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

0.8

45% payline or

lottery line

15% payline or

lottery line

Investigator's ROI

150%

Benefit or cost

We illustrate the model’s behavior by choosing a few

possible sets of parameter values. Our parameter choices

are not directly informed by data. Thus, while the nu-

merical examples illustrate the model’s possible behav-

ior, we highlight the results that are guaranteed to hold

in general.

Throughout, we use the following baseline

set of parameters. We assume that the project values, v,

have a triangular distribution ranging from vmin = 0.25

to vmax = 1 with a mode at vmin, such that low-value

ideas are common and high-value ideas are rare (i.e.,

F(v) = 1 −(16/9)(1 −v)2). For the cost function, we

choose c(v, x) = x2/v. We choose a convex dependence

on x to suggest that the marginal cost of improving a

proposal increases as the proposal becomes stronger. We

assume that the intrinsic scientiﬁc value of writing a pro-

posal allows investigators to recoup k = 1/3 of the disu-

tility cost of proposal preparation. We ﬁrst explore the

case when investigators are motivated purely by the sci-

entiﬁc value of their projects (v0 = 0), and then introduce

extra-scientiﬁc beneﬁts (v0 = 0.25). In the Supporting

Information, we provide parallel results with two alter-

native parameter sets.

The evaluation process by which review panels rank

proposals introduces a layer of randomness to the award-

ing of grants [23–25]. To capture noisy assessment, we use

a bivariate copula [26] to specify the joint distribution of

a proposal’s actual quantile, and its quantile as assessed

by the funding agency’s review panel. A bivariate copula

is a probability distribution on the unit square that has

uniformly distributed marginals, as all quantiles must.

We use a Clayton copula [27], which allows for accurate

assessment of weak proposals, but noisier assessment of

strong proposals (Fig. S2). This choice is motivated by

the pervasive notion that review panels can readily dis-

tinguish strong proposals from weak ones, but struggle

to discriminate among strong proposals [16, 25, 28]. A

Clayton copula has a single parameter (θ) that controls

how tightly its two components are correlated. Rather

arbitrarily, we use θ = 10 in the baseline parameter set.

The Clayton copula has the important property that a

proposal’s probability of funding increases monotonically

as its strength increases, regardless of the payline. Thus,

we exclude the possibility that panels systematically fa-

vor weaker proposals. By using a copula, we implicitly

0.6

100%

0.4

50%

0.2

0.0

0%

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Proposal strength (x)

Quantile of scientific value

FIG. 2. Diminishing paylines reduce investigators’ re-

turns on their investments in a proposal competition.

A: Equilibrium beneﬁt (blue or green) and cost (red) curves

for an investigator with a project at the 90th percentile of v

in a proposal competition. The blue and green curves show

the beneﬁt at a 45% and 15% payline, respectively. Verti-

cal lines show the investigator’s equilibrium bid, with solid

portions giving the investigator’s payoﬀ, and dashed portions

showing the cost. The corner in the beneﬁt curves appears at

the strongest proposal submitted. B: An investigator’s ROI

(eq. 3) in a proposal competition with 45% (solid line) or

15% (dashed line) paylines, as a function of the quantile of

the scientiﬁc value of her project, F(v). These curves also

give the investigator’s ROI in a partial lottery with a 45%

or 15% lottery line, and any payline. These results use the

baseline parameters.

From the funding agency’s perspective, with our base-

line parameters, both the average scientiﬁc value and

average waste per funded proposal increase as the pay-

line falls, for paylines below 50% (Fig. 3A). However, as

the payline decreases, waste escalates more quickly than

scientiﬁc value, reducing the scientiﬁc gain per funded

project (Fig. 3B). This same result also appears in our

alternative parameter sets (Fig. S5–S6). We will argue

below that the decline in scientiﬁc eﬃciency at low pay-

lines is an inevitable if unfortunate characteristic of pro-

posal competitions.

Clearly, quantitative details of the model’s predictions

depend on the parameter inputs.

To understand the

robustness of these predictions, it helps to study the

case where panels discriminate perfectly among propos-

als. While perfect discrimination is obviously unrealistic

in practice, it yields a powerful and general set of results

that illuminate how the model behaves when discrimi-

nation is imperfect.

Numerical results for perfect dis-



5

we wouldn’t expect scientiﬁc eﬃciency to decline mono-

tonically with a falling payline, because there are likely

to be some low-value projects that can be weeded out at

low cost. However, our last result above guarantees that

the scientiﬁc gain per funded proposal must eventually

vanish as the payline declines to a single award.

Returning to the reality of imperfect discrimination, as

long as review panels do not systematically favor weaker

proposals, noisy assessment changes little about these

qualitative results. That is, investigators’ ROIs will drop

as paylines fall, the average scientiﬁc value per funded

proposal will increase as paylines decrease, and the sci-

entiﬁc eﬃciency of the proposal competition must even-

tually decline as the payline approaches a single award.

But eﬃciency need not drop to zero. Perhaps counter-

intuitively, imperfect discrimination is a saving grace at

low paylines.

Noisy assessment discourages top inves-

tigators from pouring excessive eﬀort into grant-writing

as paylines fall, because the marginal beneﬁt of writing

an even better grant becomes small when review panels

struggle to discriminate among top proposals. Indeed,

noisy assessment, unlike perfect discrimination, allows a

proposal competition to retain a positive impact on sci-

ence even with a single funded grant (compare Figs. 3

and S8). This result hints at the salutary nature of ran-

domness at low paylines, which we will see more vividly

when we consider lotteries below.

Thus far, we have considered the case where investi-

gators are motivated only by the scientiﬁc value of the

projects proposed (v0 = 0). Now suppose that investi-

gators are additionally motivated by the extra-scientiﬁc

beneﬁts of receiving a grant, such as professional ad-

vancement or prestige (v0 > 0). Eq. 2 shows that adding

extra-scientiﬁc motivation will increase the eﬀort that in-

vestigators devote to preparing grant proposals.

How-

ever, in our model at least, this extra eﬀort has no bear-

ing on which grants are funded, and thus does not aﬀect

the scientiﬁc value of the grants that are awarded. In-

creasing scientiﬁc costs without increasing scientiﬁc value

will clearly be detrimental to the funding program’s sci-

entiﬁc eﬃciency. Extra-scientiﬁc beneﬁts to investigators

can even cause the entire funding program to operate at

a loss to science when paylines are low (Fig. 3).

Avg. scientific value or waste

Scientific gain or loss

per funded proposal

per funded proposal

0.30

value

waste, v0 = 0

waste, v0 = 0.25

v0 = 0

v0 = 0.25

0.8

0.25

0.20

0.7

0.15

0.6

0.10

0.5

0.05

0.00

10%

30%

50%

A

B

0.4

−0.05

10%

30%

50%

Payline or lottery line

FIG. 3. Both decreasing paylines and extra-scientiﬁc

rewards to investigators reduce the scientiﬁc eﬃ-

ciency of the funding program.

A: Both the average

scientiﬁc value per funded proposal (blue line, eq. 4) and the

average waste per funded proposal (red lines, eq. 5) are higher

for lower paylines, for the baseline parameter set and paylines

≤50%. The solid red line shows costs when investigators are

motivated only by the scientiﬁc value of the funded research

(v0 = 0); the dashed red line shows costs when investigators

are additionally motivated by private, extra-scientiﬁc rewards

(v0 = 0.25). Note that the vertical axis does not extend to 0.

B: The scientiﬁc gain or loss per funded proposal is lower for

lower paylines, both in the absence (v0 = 0, solid line) and

presence (v0 = 0.25, dashed line) of extra-scientiﬁc beneﬁts

to investigators. Values of other parameters are as speciﬁed

in the main text. Identical results hold if the horizontal axis

is re-interpreted as the proportion of proposals that qualify

for a lottery, regardless of the payline.

crimination under the baseline parameter set appear in

Figs. S7–S8.

At equilibrium under perfect assessment, every project

above a threshold value v⋆= F −1(1 −p) will receive

funding, and no project idea below this threshold will

be funded. Investigators with projects of value v > v⋆

all prepare proposals to the identical strength x⋆=

h−1 [(v0 + v⋆)/((1 −k)g(v⋆))], and are funded with cer-

tainty. Investigators with projects of value v < v⋆opt

out (Fig. S7). All of the subsequent results follow. (De-

tails appear in Appendix S1.) First, as paylines drop, all

investigators realize either a diminishing or zero ROI, be-

cause investigators who remain in the competition must

pay a higher cost for a reduced payoﬀ. Second, the av-

erage scientiﬁc value per funded proposal must increase

as paylines drop, because only the highest-value projects

are funded under low paylines.

Third, in the limiting

case when only one of many proposals can be funded

(technically, the limit as p approaches 0 from above), the

scientiﬁc value and scientiﬁc waste associated with the

last funded project converge, and science is no better oﬀ

than if no grant had been given at all (Fig. S8).

With perfect assessment, there is no general relation-

ship between the scientiﬁc eﬃciency of a proposal com-

petition and the payline that holds across the full range

of paylines (but see Hoppe et al. [22] for a sharp result

when the cost function is independent of v). Of course,

LOTTERIES

Our model can also be used to analyze the eﬃciency

of a partial lottery for advancing science. Suppose that

a fraction q ≥p of proposals qualify for the lottery, and

each qualifying proposal is equally likely to be chosen for

funding. Call q the “lottery line”. Now, the investigator’s

payoﬀis (p/q)(v0 + v)ηl(x) −(1 −k)c(v, x), where ηl(x)

is the equilibrium probability that the proposal qualiﬁes

for the lottery. In Appendix S1, we show that the inves-

tigator’s bid is given by

Z v

b(v) = h−1

p

g(t) ξ′

l(t) dt



(6)

q

1

1 −k

v0 + t

0



6

where ξl(v) = ηl(b(v)).

Our major result for lotteries is that measures of sci-

entiﬁc eﬃciency — expressions 3, 4, and 5 — depend on

the lottery line q but are independent of the payline p

(proofs appear in Appendix S1). This result follows from

the fact that, in a lottery, each investigator’s beneﬁt and

cost are proportional to p. Thus, an investigator’s ROI

and the scientiﬁc eﬃciency of the funding program are

determined by the lottery line, but are not aﬀected by

the payline. To illustrate, Fig. 4 compares an investiga-

tor’s costs and beneﬁts in a proposal competition with

45%, 30%, and 15% paylines vs. a partial lottery with a

q = 45% lottery line and the same three paylines. The

key feature of Fig. 4 is that the investigator’s beneﬁt

curve in a partial lottery scales in such a way that her

ROI is the same for any payline ≤q. Consequently, a

partial lottery with a lottery line of q and any payline

≤q achieves the same scientiﬁc eﬃciency as a proposal

competition with a payline of q.

Thus, our numerical results showing the investigator’s

ROI (Fig. 2B) or the scientiﬁc eﬃciency (Fig. 3) in a

funding competition also show the eﬃciency of a lottery

with the equivalent lottery line.

That is, a lottery in

which 45% of applicants qualify for the lottery has the

same scientiﬁc eﬃciency as a proposal competition with

a 45% payline, regardless of the fraction of proposals cho-

sen for the lottery that are ultimately funded. Thus, a

lottery can restore the losses in eﬃciency that a proposal

competition suﬀers as paylines become small.

small number of tiers, with proposals in more selective

tiers awarded a greater chance of funding [13, 17, 29]. In

a multi-tier lottery, the eﬃciency is entirely determined

by the number of tiers and the relative probabilities of

funding in each, and is independent of the payline. Nu-

merical results (Fig. S9) illustrate that the scientiﬁc value

and waste of a multi-tier lottery fall in between those of

a proposal competition and a single-tier lottery. Thus,

a multi-tier lottery oﬀers an intermediate design that

would partially reduce the waste associated with prepar-

ing proposals, while still allowing review panels to reward

the best proposals with a higher probability of funding.


## DISCUSSION


Our major result is that proposal competitions are in-

evitably and inescapably ineﬃcient mechanisms for fund-

ing science when the number of awards is smaller than the

number of meritorious proposals. The contest model pre-

sented here suggests that a partially randomized scheme

for allocating funds — that is, a lottery — can restore

the eﬃciency lost as paylines fall, albeit at the expense of

reducing the average scientiﬁc value of the projects that

are funded.

Why does a lottery disengage eﬃciency from the pay-

line, while a proposal competition does not? For inves-

tigators, proposal competitions are, to a ﬁrst approxi-

mation, all-or-nothing aﬀairs — an investigator only ob-

tains a substantial payoﬀif her grant is funded. At high

paylines (or, more precisely, when the number of awards

matches the number of high-value projects), investiga-

tors with high-value projects can write proposals that

win funding at modest cost to themselves. As the num-

ber of awards dwindles, however, competition stiﬀens.

Depending on the details of the assessment process, an

investigator with a high-value project must either work

harder for the same chance of funding, or work just as

hard for a smaller chance of funding. Either way, the re-

turn on her investment declines sharply. Thus, a contest

is most eﬃcient at the payline that weeds out low-value

projects, but does not attempt to discriminate among

the high-value projects (e.g., Fig. S6).

At lower pay-

lines, however, the eﬀort needed to signal which projects

are most valuable begins to approach the value of those

projects, making the funding program less worthwhile.

In a lottery, investigators do not compete for awards

per se, but instead compete for admission to the lottery.

The value to the investigator of being admitted to the lot-

tery scales directly with the number of awards. It turns

out that both the investigator’s expected beneﬁt and her

costs of participation scale directly with the payline, and

thus the payline has no eﬀect on eﬃciency. (In Appendix

S1, we follow Hoppe et al. [22] to show that this scaling

can be explained by the economic principle of revenue

equivalence.) If there are fewer awards than high-value

projects, a lottery that weeds out the low-value projects

but does not attempt to discriminate among high-value

A: Proposal competition

B: Qualifying lottery

1.0

1.0

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 30%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 30%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

0.8

0.8

Benefit or cost

Benefit or cost

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Proposal strength (x)

Proposal strength (x)

FIG. 4. An investigator’s ROI falls as the payline drops

in a proposal competition, but is independent of the

payline in a partial lottery. A: Beneﬁt (blue or green) and

cost (red) curves for an investigator with a project at the 90th

percentile of v in a proposal competition. The dark blue, light

blue, and green curves shows beneﬁts with a 45%, 30%, and

15% payline, respectively. Vertical lines show the investiga-

tor’s bid, with the length of the solid portion giving the payoﬀ,

and the length of the dashed portion giving the cost. The in-

vestigator’s ROI declines as the payline decreases. (Note also

that her eﬀort does not vary monotonically with the payline.)

B: The same investigator’s beneﬁt and cost curves in a par-

tial lottery with a 45% lottery line. The investigator’s ROI

is the same for all paylines. These results use the baseline

parameter set given in the main text.

In Appendix S1, we also analyze a more general type

of lottery in which proposals are placed into one of a



7

administrators value and reward grant success because

of the associated overhead funds that ﬂow to the univer-

sity, funding agencies could reduce waste by distributing

overhead separately from funding awards. Instead, per-

haps overhead could be allocated based partially on the

recent past productivity of investigators at qualifying in-

stitutions, among other possible criteria.

Disengaging

overhead from individual grants would encourage admin-

istrators to value grants for the science those grants en-

able (as opposed to the overhead they bring), while allo-

cating overhead based on institutions aggregate scientiﬁc

productivity would motivate universities to help their in-

vestigators produce good science.

Funding agencies often have pragmatic reasons to em-

phasize the meritocratic nature of their award processes.

However, our model also suggests that downplaying el-

ements of a funding competition’s structure that intro-

duce randomness to funding decisions can increase scien-

tiﬁc waste. When applicants fail to recognize the degree

to which the contest is already a lottery, they will over-

invest eﬀort in preparing proposals, to the detriment of

science.

This model does not account for all of the costs or

scientiﬁc beneﬁts of a proposal competition, including

the costs of administering the competition, the time lost

to reviewing grant proposals, or the beneﬁt of building

scientiﬁc community through convening a review panel.

Nonetheless, we suggest that the direct value of the sci-

ence supported by funding awards and the disutility costs

of preparing grant proposals are the predominant scien-

tiﬁc beneﬁts and costs of the usual proposal competition

[13, 30], and provide a useful starting point for a more

detailed accounting.

Our model also makes several simplifying assumptions,

each of which may provide scope for interesting future

work.

First, researchers pay a time cost to prepare a

proposal, but receive money if the proposal is funded. In

our model, we have converted both time and money into

scientiﬁc productivity, in order to place both on a com-

mon footing. To be more explicit, though, scientiﬁc pro-

ductivity requires both time and money (among other re-

sources), and researchers may have vastly diﬀerent needs

for both. In the Appendix, we show that our model can

be formally extended to encompass researchers’ diﬀerent

needs for time and money if the marginal rate of tech-

nical substitution (that is, the rate at which time and

money can be exchanged without altering scientiﬁc pro-

ductivity) is exactly correlated with the project’s scien-

tiﬁc value. Our main results still hold in this case, as

long as researchers with the best ideas do not value time

so greatly that they write the weakest proposals. A more

general exploration of researchers’ heterogeneous needs

for time and money — and of how researchers may ad-

just their portfolio of scientiﬁc activities when time or

money is scarce — provide ample opportunity for future

work.

Second, our model assumes that the distribution of

the scientiﬁc value (v) across possible projects is ex-

projects will facilitate scientiﬁc progress more eﬃciently

than a contest.

Unfortunately, empirical comparisons between the ef-

ﬁciencies of funding competitions versus partial lotteries

do not yet exist, to the best of our knowledge. However,

two recent anecdotes support our prediction that the

waste in proposal competitions is driven by the strate-

gic dynamics of the contest itself.

First, in 2012, the

U.S. National Science Foundation’s Divisions of Envi-

ronmental Biology and Integrative Organismal Systems

switched from a twice-annual, one-stage proposal compe-

tition to a once-annual, two-stage competition, in part to

reduce applicants’ workload. However, the switch failed

to reduce the applicants’ aggregate workload meaning-

fully [30], and the two-stage mechanism was subsequently

abandoned. Second, in 2014, the National Health and

Medical Research Council of Australia streamlined the

process of applying for their Project Grants, cutting the

length of an application in half [31]. However, researchers

spent more time, not less, preparing proposals after the

process had been streamlined, both individually and in

aggregate [31]. Both of these experiences are consistent

with our prediction that, in a proposal competition, the

eﬀort applicants expend is dictated by the value of fund-

ing to the applicants and the number of awards available,

but does not depend on the particular format of the pro-

posals.

A lottery is a radical alternative, and may be polit-

ically untenable [32].

If a lottery is not viable, an al-

ternative approach to restoring eﬃciency is to design a

contest where the eﬀort given to competing for awards

has more direct scientiﬁc value. For example, a contest

that rewards good science in its completed form — as op-

posed to rewarding well-crafted proposals that describe

future science — motivates the actual practice of good

science, and will be less wasteful at low paylines [9, 14].

Program oﬃcers could be given the discretion to allo-

cate some funds by proactively scouting for promising

researchers or projects. Of course, a contest based on

completed science or scouting has its own drawbacks, in-

cluding rich-getting-richer feedback loops, a risk of new

barriers to entry for investigators from historically under-

represented demographic groups, and the Goodhart’s law

phenomenon, whereby a metric that becomes a target

ceases to be a good metric [33]. Nevertheless, it is tan-

talizing to envision a world in which the resources that

universities currently devote to helping researchers write

proposals are instead devoted to helping researchers do

science.

This analysis also shows that extra-scientiﬁc profes-

sional incentives to pursue grant funding can damage the

scientiﬁc eﬃciency of a proposal competition. As many of

these extra-scientiﬁc incentives arise from administrators

using grant success as a primary yardstick of professional

achievement, perhaps one major beneﬁt of adding ex-

plicit randomness to the funding mechanism would be to

compel administrators to de-emphasize grant success in

professional evaluations. Alternatively, to the degree that



8

model. However, the qualitative results — that proposal

competitions become increasingly ineﬃcient as paylines

drop, and that professional pressure on investigators to

pursue funding exacerbates these ineﬃciencies — are in-

herent to the structure of contests. Partial lotteries and

contests that reward past success present radical alter-

natives for allocating funds, and are sure to be contro-

versial.

Nevertheless, whatever their other merits and

drawbacks, these alternatives could restore eﬃciency in

distributing funds that has been lost as those funds have

become increasingly scarce.

ogeneous to the structure of the funding competition.

This may not be the case if, for instance, a partial lot-

tery encourages participation by investigators with un-

conventional views, reduces the psychological stigma of

previous rejection [16], or discourages investigators ei-

ther who have succeeded under the traditional proposal-

competition format or who perceive a lottery as riskier.

In reality, such feedback loops may endogenize the dis-

tribution of v. Third, our model does not consider the

savings that may accrue to investigators if they can sub-

mit a revised version of a rejected proposal to a diﬀer-

ent or subsequent competition.

To a ﬁrst approxima-

tion, submissions to multiple funders have the eﬀect of

increasing p, which can then be interpreted more gen-

erally as the proportion of ideas that get funded across

all available funding programs. Iterations of revision and

resubmission to the same funding program are likely to

have more complex eﬀects on eﬃciency and waste. Fi-

nally, our model is silent regarding whether many small

or few large grants will promote scientiﬁc progress most

eﬃciently, and is likewise silent about the factors that

will inﬂuence this comparison.

To be sure, much more can be done to embellish this


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


We thank M. Lachmann for early discussions, A. Bar-

nett and T. Bergstrom for useful feedback on an earlier

draft, and B. Moldovanu for helping us articulate clearly

the tension between proposal competitions and lotteries.

KG thanks the University of Washington Department of

Biology for visitor support.

[10] Danielle L Herbert, Adrian G Barnett, Philip Clarke, and

Nicholas Graves. On the time spent preparing grant pro-

posals: an observational study of australian researchers.

BMJ Open, 3(5):e002800, 2013.

[11] Michele Pagano. American Idol and NIH grant review.

Cell, 126(4):637–638, 2006.

[12] Peter A Lawrence. Real lives and white lies in the funding

of scientiﬁc research. PLoS Biology, 7(9):e1000197, 2009.

[13] Nicholas Graves, Adrian G Barnett, and Philip Clarke.

Funding grant proposals for scientiﬁc research: retrospec-

tive analysis of scores by members of grant review panel.

BMJ, 343:d4797, 2011.

[14] John PA Ioannidis. More time for research: fund people

not projects. Nature, 477(7366):529–531, 2011.

[15] Johan Bollen, David Crandall, Damion Junk, Ying Ding,

and Katy B¨orner.

From funding agencies to scientiﬁc

agency. EMBO Reports, 15(2):131–133, 2014.

[16] Ferric C. Fang and Arturo Casadevall. Research funding:

the case for a modiﬁed lottery. mBio, 7(2):e00422–16,

2016.

[17] Shahar Avin. Centralized funding and epistemic explo-

ration. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,

page axx059, 2018.

[18] Krist Vaesen and Joel Katzav. How much would each re-

searcher receive if competitive government research fund-

ing were distributed equally among researchers?

PLoS

ONE, 12(9):e0183967, 2017.

[19] Shahar Avin. Policy considerations for random allocation

of research funds. RT. A Journal on Research Policy and

Evaluation, 6(1), 2018.

[20] Benny Moldovanu and Aner Sela. The optimal allocation

of prizes in contests. American Economic Review, pages

542–558, 2001.

[1] Stephen Cole, Leonard Rubin, and Jonathan R Cole.

Peer review in the National Science Foundation: Phase

one of a study. National Academy of Sciences, 1978.

[2] National Institutes of Health. NIH funding facts. https:

//report.nih.gov/fundingfacts/fundingfacts.aspx,


## 2017. Accessed Dec. 29, 2017.


[3] DEB

Science

Staﬀ.

DEB

Numbers:

FY

2016

wrap-up.

https://debblog.nsfbio.com/2017/01/06/

deb-numbers-fy-2016-wrap-up/, 2017.

Accessed Oct.

11, 2017.

[4] National Science Foundation. Report to the National Sci-

ence Board on the National Science Foundation’s merit

review process, Fiscal Year 2016, 2017. NSB-2017-26.

[5] Nicholas Geard and Jason Noble.

Modelling academic

research funding as a resource allocation problem.

In

3rd World Congress on Social Simulation, 6-9 September,

2010, Kassel, Germany, 2010.

[6] Albert N Link, Christopher A Swann, and Barry Boze-

man. A time allocation study of university faculty. Eco-

nomics of Education Review, 27(4):363–374, 2008.

[7] Robert Siliciano. Testimony before the Senate Commit-

tee on Appropriations: Subcommittee on Labor, Health

and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies.

U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations, Washington,

DC, March 19, 2007.

[8] Adrian G. Barnett. Ask the researcher: The experience

of applying for health and medical research funding in

australia — survey results. https://eprints.qut.edu.

au/107238/, 2013. Accessed Apr. 19, 2018.

[9] Bruce Alberts, Marc W Kirschner, Shirley Tilghman, and

Harold Varmus. Rescuing US biomedical research from

its systemic ﬂaws. Proceedings of the National Academy

of Sciences, 111(16):5773–5777, 2014.



9

[21] Milan Vojnovi´c. Contest theory: Incentive mechanisms

and ranking methods. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

[22] Heidrun C Hoppe, Benny Moldovanu, and Aner Sela. The

theory of assortative matching based on costly signals.

The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1):253–281, 2009.

[23] Stephen Cole, Leonard Rubin, and Jonathan R Cole.

Peer review in the National Science Foundation: Phase

two of a study. National Academy of Sciences, 1981.

[24] Mikael Fogelholm, Saara Leppinen, Anssi Auvinen, Jani

Raitanen, Anu Nuutinen, and Kalervo V¨a¨an¨anen. Panel


## discussion does not improve reliability of peer review for


medical research grant proposals. Journal of Clinical Epi-

demiology, 65(1):47–52, 2012.

[25] Elizabeth L Pier, Markus Brauer, Amarette Filut, Anna

Kaatz, Joshua Raclaw, Mitchell J Nathan, Cecilia E

Ford, and Molly Carnes. Low agreement among reviewers

evaluating the same nih grant applications. Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(12):2952–2957,

2018.

[26] Roger B Nelsen. An introduction to copulas. Springer,

2nd edition, 2006.

[27] David G Clayton. A model for association in bivariate life

tables and its application in epidemiological studies of fa-

milial tendency in chronic disease incidence. Biometrika,

65(1):141–151, 1978.

[28] Samuel M Scheiner and Lynette M Bouchie. The pre-

dictive power of NSF reviewers and panels. Frontiers in

Ecology and the Environment, 11(8):406–407, 2013.

[29] Elise S Brezis. Focal randomisation: An optimal mech-

anism for the evaluation of r&d projects. Science and

Public Policy, 34(10):691–698, 2007.

[30] Luba Katz, Daniel Litwok, and Jessie Gertels. Evaluation

of the NSF DEB and IOS switch to preliminary proposal

review: Final report. Technical report, Abt Associates,

2017.

[31] Adrian G Barnett, Nicholas Graves, Philip Clarke, and

Danielle Herbert.

The impact of a streamlined fund-

ing application process on application time: two cross-

sectional surveys of australian researchers. BMJ open, 5

(1):e006912, 2015.

[32] Adrian G Barnett. Funding by lottery: Political problems

and research opportunities. mBio, 7(4):e01369–16, 2016.

[33] Charles AE Goodhart. Problems of monetary manage-

ment:

The UK experience.

In Monetary Theory and

Practice, pages 91–121. Springer, 1984.

[34] NIH Oﬃce of Extramural Research.

Actual of NIH

R01 equivalent success rate FY 1970 – 2008 and esti-

mates of NIH R01 success rates, FY 1962 – 1969 from

CGAF.

http://report.nih.gov/FileLink.aspx?rid=

796&ver=1. Accessed Dec. 29, 2017, 2008.



10

tigator with a project of value v1 should not submit a

bid as if her project had value v2, and similarly the in-

vestigator whose project has value v2 should not submit

a bid as if her project had value v1. This yields:


## APPENDIX S1: MATHEMATICAL DETAILS


Bid function

The bid function b(v) can be found following steps that

are identical to the derivation of the ﬁrst part of Propo-

sition 8 in Hoppe et al. [22]. We repeat that derivation

here, almost fully verbatim.

Begin by dividing the investigator’s payoﬀfunction by

by (1 −k)g(v) to rescale the investigator’s optimization

problem (eq. 1) :

(v0 + v1)

(1 −k)g(v1)η(b(v1)) −h(b(v1)) ≥

(v0 + v1)

(1 −k)g(v1)η(b(v2)) −h(b(v2))

(v0 + v2)

(1 −k)g(v2)η(b(v2)) −h(b(v2)) ≥

(v0 + v2)

(1 −k)g(v2)η(b(v1)) −h(b(v1)).



(v0 + v)

(1 −k)g(v)η(x) −h(x)



.

(S1)

b(v) = arg max

x

Rearrange each inequality to isolate h(b(v1)) −h(b(v2))

and divide through by v1 −v2 to give

Consider two projects of values v1 and v2, v1 > v2, with

equilibrium bids b(v1) and b(v2), respectively. The inves-

(v0+v1)

(1−k)g(v1)(η(b(v1)) −η(b(v2)))

(v0+v2)

(1−k)g(v2)(η(b(v1)) −η(b(v2)))

v1 −v2

≤h(b(v)) −h(b(ˆv))

v1 −v2

≤

v1 −v2

.

Take the limit as v2 →v1 to give

that investigators with higher value projects will submit

stronger proposals. This condition rules out the possibil-

ity that, say, variation in v0 or k is large enough that

either replaces v as the primary correlate of proposal

strength. When this key condition holds, the derivation

above proceeds as before, leading to a bid function of

d

dv h(b(v)) =

v0 + v

(1 −k)g(v)

d

dv η(b(v)).

(S2)

Essentially, after rescaling investigators’ beneﬁts and

costs so that the cost function (h(x)) is the same for all

investigators, eq. S2 says that, at equilibrium, an investi-

gator’s marginal (re-scaled) cost and marginal (re-scaled)

beneﬁt of preparing an inﬁnitesimally stronger proposal

are equal [22].

Proceeding with the derivation, multi-

ply both sides of eq. S2 by dv to separate variables and

integrate from 0 to v to obtain

Z v

b(v) = h−1

Z v

v0(t) + t

(1 −k(t))g(t) ξ′(t) dt



.

(S6)

0

In this case, variation in v0 or k among investigators may

change the value of investigators’ bids, but it does not

change the rank of investigators’ bids (that is, higher-

value projects are still associated with stronger propos-

als). Because we use a copula to capture noisy assessment

of proposals, an investigator’s probability of funding de-

pends only on the rank of the investigator’s bid, and thus

the portfolio of funded projects does not change.

Finally, we can extend the model to accommodate re-

searchers’ diﬀering needs for time and money, as long

as the marginal rate of technical substitution for time vs.

money is also a function of v. In this case, we re-interpret

the cost function c(v, x) = g(v)h(x) as the time cost of

writing a proposal, and we assume that the monetary cost

of writing a proposal is negligible. Let φ be a conversion

factor that converts time into scientiﬁc productivity, such

that the disutility cost of writing a proposal in terms of

lost productivity is φc(v, x). Moreover, suppose φ is also

a function of v. Then, we can write the investigator’s

optimization problem as

0

dh(b(t)) =

Z v

v0 + t

(1 −k)g(t) ξ′(t) dt

(S3)

0

where ξ(v) = η(b(v)). Then use h(b(0)) = h(0) = 0 to

give

R v

0 dh(b(t)) = h(b(v)), and thus

h(b(v)) =

Z v

v0 + t

(1 −k)g(t) ξ′(t) dt.

(S4)

0

Take h−1 on both sides to complete the derivation.

To make our derivation somewhat more general than in

the main text, suppose that both v0 and k are themselves

functions of v, such that the investigator’s optimization

problem now becomes



(v0(v) + v)

(1 −k(v))g(v)η(x) −h(x)



.

(S5)

b(v) = arg max

x

b(v) = arg max

x

{(v0(v) + v)η(x) −(1 −k(v))φ(v)g(v)h(x)} .

We

require

the

key

condition

that

the

quantity

(v0(v)+v)

(1−k(v))g(v) is a strictly increasing function of v, so

(S7)



11

C(u, w) = Pr{U ≤u, W ≤w}. Given a value of U, the

conditional distribution of W given U is CW |U(u, w) =

Pr{W ≤w|U = u} = ∂C(u, w)/∂u. (Here we use the fact

that U is uniformly distributed on the unit interval.) To

ﬁnd ξ(v), evaluate CW |U at u = F(v) and w = 1 −p to

ﬁnd 1−ξ(v), the probability that an idea of value v is not

funded. Take the complement to ﬁnd ξ(v). Diﬀerentiate

with respect to v to ﬁnd ξ′(v), which can then be plugged

in to eq. 2.

The distribution function for a Clayton copula [27] is

[26, §4.2]

As

before,

we

require

the

key

condition

that

(v0(v)+v)

(1−k(v))φ(v)g(v) is a strictly increasing function of v,

to ensure that proposal strength is positively corre-

lated with scientiﬁc value at equilibrium.

Under this

condition, the same steps give a bid function of

b(v) = h−1

Z v

v0(t) + t

(1 −k(t))φ(t)g(t) ξ′(t) dt



.

(S8)

0

To demonstrate that b(v) maximizes the investiga-

tor’s payoﬀ(as opposed to minimizing it), we follow

Moldovanu & Sela’s [20] “pseudo-concavity” argument.

This argument requires that b′(v) > 0, which we estab-

lish ﬁrst. To do so, note that h−1 in eq. 2 is an increasing

function (because h is an increasing function), and that

(v0 + t)/g(t) > 0 in the integrand of eq. 2.

Thus, to

show that b′(v) > 0, it suﬃces to show that ξ′(v) > 0,

that is, that the probability of being funded increases as

the value of the scientiﬁc project increases. We expect

this condition to hold under any reasonable model of how

proposals are assessed. Basic but tedious calculus estab-

lishes that it does hold for the Clayton copula that we

describe below.

Having established that b′(v)

>

0,

the pseudo-

concavity argument of Moldovanu & Sela [20] proceeds

as follows. Let ϖ(v, x) = (v0 + v)η(x) −(1 −k)g(v)h(x)

be the payoﬀassociated with a project of value v and a

proposal of quality x. Let ϖx = ∂ϖ(v, x)/∂x. We claim

that ϖx > 0 for x < b(v), and ϖx < 0 for x > b(v).

These claims, together with the continuity of b(v), estab-

lish that x = b(v) maximizes ϖ(v, x).

We ﬁrst show that ϖx > 0 for x < b(v). Choose a

value of x < b(v), and let v⋆be the value of a project

that will generate a bid of x, that is, b(v⋆) = x. Because

b′(v) > 0, it follows that v⋆< v. Simple diﬀerentiation

gives

C(u, w) =

 

u−θ + w−θ −1

−1/θ .

(S11)

The parameter θ ≥0 controls the strength of the associ-

ation between U and W, with larger values of θ giving

stronger associations (i.e., more accurate assessment of

grant proposals).

Alternative parameter sets

To complement the example in the main text, we show

numerical results for two alternative parameter sets. In

the ﬁrst alternative set, scientiﬁc value is uniformly dis-

tributed across projects, the disutility cost increases lin-

early with proposal quality, and assessment is less precise

than we assume in the baseline parameter set. In this set,

v is uniformly distributed between 1/3 and 1. We use

c(v, x) = xe−v for the cost function, and we use θ = 5 in

the Clayton copula (Fig. S2B).

The second alternative parameter set captures a sce-

nario where the pool of possible project values is bi-

modal, with many minimal-value projects and equally

many maximal-value projects.

In this alternative set,

v ranges from 1/2 to 1. To construct the distribution

of v, let Y be a beta random variable with both shape

parameters equal to 1/2.

Thus, Y has a symmetric,

U-shaped distribution on the unit interval.

Then v is

given by (1 + Y )/2.

In this parameter set, we choose

c(v, x) = (1.5 −v)x2, and we set θ = 7.5 in the Clayton

copula.

Both alternative parameter sets use k = 1/3.

ϖx(v, x) = (v0 + v)η′(x) −(1 −k)g(v)h′(x).

(S9)

Now diﬀerentiate ϖx with respect to v to give the mixed

derivative

ϖxv(v, x) = η′(x) −(1 −k)g′(v)h′(x).

(S10)

Under the assumptions of our model, η′(x) > 0, g′(v) <

0, and h′(x) > 0; thus, ϖxv > 0. Therefore, ϖx is an

increasing function of v, and thus ϖx(v⋆, x) < ϖx(v, x).

By virtue of the fact that b(v⋆) = x, we have ϖx(v⋆, x) =


## 0. Therefore, ϖx(v, x) > 0.


The proof that ϖx < 0 for x > b(v) follows similarly.

Perfect discrimination

Copulas for noisy assessment

In the perfect discrimination case, we require that

there is a maximum possible value of v, which we write

vmax. The previous derivation of the bid function does

not work for perfect discrimination, because b(v) becomes

a step function and thus is not diﬀerentiable. Instead, let

v⋆denote the threshold value, that is, v⋆= F −1(1 −p).

Under perfect discrimination, the threshold investigator

A bivariate copula is simply a bivariate probability dis-

tribution on the unit square with uniform marginal dis-

tributions [26].

Let U = F(v) be the actual quantile

of a proposal, and let W be the assessed quantile. The

joint distribution of U and W is given by the copula



12

will break even regardless of her bid. Thus,

where ηi(x) is the probability that a proposal of quality

x is placed in tier i. A similar derivation to the steps in

eq. S2–S4 yields the bid function

gk(v⋆)h(x)





v0 + v⋆

x ≤x⋆

η(x) =

1

x > x⋆

(S12)

b(v) = h−1

" z

X

Z v

#

πi

1 −k

v0 + t



g(t) ξ′

i(t) dt

.

(S18)

0

i=1

where

where ξi(v) = ηi(b(v)).

We now show that the eﬃciency of a lottery depends

entirely on the structure of the lottery, and is indepen-

dent of the payline. For multi-tier lotteries, we require

that the ratios of the πi’s — the probabilities of funding

in each tier — are ﬁxed. To establish these ratios, write

κi = πi/π1. The condition Pz

i=1 qiπi = p implies that

the probability that a proposal in tier i is funded is

x⋆= h−1

v0 + v⋆



.

(S13)

gk(v⋆)

Consequently, it is straightforward to show that the bid

function is

(

x⋆

v > v⋆

b(v) =

0

v < v⋆.

(S14)

πi =

pκi

P

i κiqi

,

(S19)

The following results are all immediate.

First, as the

payline drops, v⋆increases, and hence x⋆increases. (Re-

call that g is a strictly decreasing function, and h−1 is

a strictly increasing function.) Thus, investigators with

v > v⋆experience a reduced payoﬀand increased costs,

leading to a reduced ROI. Second, the average scientiﬁc

beneﬁt per funded proposal, which can be written as

Z vmax

as long as p ≤P

i κiqi. (If p > P

i κiqi, then we would

have π1 > 1.)

All of our results follow from showing that an investi-

gator’s beneﬁt and cost are proportional to p, and thus

the payline p cancels out of the eﬃciency calculations in

eqq. 3–5.

The investigator’s beneﬁt from entering the

competition is (v0 + v) Pz

i=1 πiηi(x). A simple substitu-

tion shows that this beneﬁt is proportional to p:

v⋆

v dF(v)

Z vmax

v⋆

dF(v),

(S15)

z

X

z

X

pκiηi(x)

P

increases as v⋆increases. Third, as p approaches 0 from

above, v⋆approaches vmax from below.

Thus, in the

limit, the bid function approaches

(v0 + v)

i=1

πiηi(x) = (v0 + v)

j κjqj

i=1

= p(v0 + v)

P

i ηi(x)κi

P

j κjqj

.



h−1

v0 + vmax



v = vmax





gk(vmax)

lim

p→0+ b(v) =

0

v < vmax.

(S16)

To show that the investigator’s cost is proportional to

p, we have

c(v, b(v)) = g(v)h(b(v))

Thus, the payoﬀto all investigators approaches 0 as p

approaches 0 from above.

Z v

z

X

πi

1 −k

v0 + t

g(t) ξ′

i(t) dt

= g(v)

0

i=1

i κi

R v

0

v0+t

g(t) ξ′

i(t) dt

Lotteries

P

= p g(v)

j κjqj

.

(1 −k) P

We consider the more general case of a multi-tier lot-

tery.

Proposals deemed worthy of funding are placed

into one of z tiers, with tier 1 representing the highest-

ranked proposals, etc. Write the proportion of propos-

als in tier i as qi, and let πi represent the probabil-

ity that a proposal placed in tier i is funded, where

1 ≥π1 > π2 > . . . > πz > 0. We assume that the fund-

ing agency determines q1, q2, . . . , qz and π1, π2, . . . , πz in

advance.

Because the payline is still p, we must have

Pz

i=1 qiπi = p. The single-tier lottery proposed by Fang

& Casadevall [16] and others is a special case with z = 1,

with a probability of funding π1 = p/q1 in that tier.

In a tiered lottery, the investigator’s maximization

problem becomes

It thus follows that the investigator’s ROI (eq. 3), the

average value per funded grant (eq. 4), and the average

waste per funded grant (eq. 5) are all independent of p.

Hoppe et al. [22] provide an argument based on the

economic principle of revenue equivalence that explains

why costs are independent of the payline in a lottery.

This argument applies both to proposal competitions and

to lotteries of any structure, and it applies regardless

of whether panels discriminate perfectly among propos-

als, or not. The argument is most easily explained in a

single-tier lottery with perfect discrimination, so we con-

sider that setting. First, for revenue equivalence to apply,

we need to re-scale the model so that only beneﬁts vary

among investigators. That is, re-scale the investigator’s

equilibrium beneﬁt function to

z

X

(

)

i=1

πiηi(x) −(1 −k)c(v, x)

b(v) = arg max

x

(v0 + v)

p

q

(v0 + v)

(1 −k)g(v)ξl(v)

(S20)

(S17)



13

and write her cost function as h(x).

Having re-scaled

the investigator’s beneﬁts and costs, the principle of rev-

enue equivalence suggests that the (re-scaled) cost paid

by an investigator will be exactly equal to the negative

externality that her entrance into the competition cre-

ates, that is, the amount by which her entrance decreases

the aggregate beneﬁt of the competing investigators [22].

With perfect discrimination, the threshold investigator

(the last one to qualify for the lottery) has project value

v⋆= F −1(1 −q); every investigator with v > v⋆quali-

ﬁes for the lottery, while every investigator with v < v⋆

opts out. Consider an investigator with an idea of value

v. If v < v⋆, then this investigator’s entrance into the

competition has no eﬀect on other investigators’ beneﬁt,

and thus the cost she pays is 0 (i.e., she opts out). If

the investigator has an idea of value v > v⋆, then she

knocks one threshold investigator out of the lottery. No

other investigator’s beneﬁt changes. Thus, the new in-

vestigator’s presence decreases the aggregate beneﬁt of

the other investigators by

p

q

(v0 + v⋆)

(1 −k)g(v⋆).

(S21)

This negative externality is exactly the re-scaled cost that

she pays, i.e.,

q

(v0 + v⋆)

(1 −k)g(v⋆).

(S22)

h(b(v)) = p

Multiplying by g(v) undoes the re-scaling to give the ac-

tual cost paid:

q

(v0 + v⋆)

(1 −k)g(v⋆).

(S23)

c(v, b(v)) = g(v)h(b(v)) = g(v)p

Two observations explain why the cost paid by the in-

vestigator is directly proportional to p. First, the identity

of the threshold investigator — the one who is knocked

out of the lottery when an investigator with a higher-

value project enters — is determined by q, not p. (In a

proposal competition, the threshold investigator is deter-

mined by p.) Second, the threshold investigator’s beneﬁt

— and hence the negative externality imposed by the

newly arriving investigator — is directly proportional to

p. Thus, the (re-scaled) cost paid by any investigator will

also be directly proportional to p. Multiplying the cost

by g(v) to undo the rescaling does not change the direct

proportionality to p.

With noisy assessment, and/or in a multi-tiered lot-

tery, the negative externality that an investigator im-

poses on the ﬁeld, and hence the (re-scaled) cost that

she pays at equilibrium, integrates the amount by which

her entry decreases the beneﬁt of every investigator with

a project value less than hers. (This is one way to under-

stand the bid functions in eq. 2, 6, and S18.) In a lottery,

everyone’s beneﬁt is proportional to p, and hence each

investigator’s negative externality, and the cost that she

pays, is proportional to p as well.



14

SUPPORTING INFORMATION FIGURES

1.2

A

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

60%

B

1.0

50%

45% payline or

lottery line

15% payline or

lottery line

Investigator's ROI

Benefit or cost

0.8

40%

0.6

30%

60%

0.4

20%

GGG

NIH estimates

actual

G

0.2

10%

G

50%

G

G

0.0

0%

G

GG

G

40%

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

G

G

G

Success rate

GG

G

G

Proposal strength (x)

Quantile of scientific value

G

GGGG

G

GGGGGGG

G

30%

GG

GG

G

G

GGG

G

G

G

GGG

G

G

FIG. S3. Parallel results to Fig. 2, except with the ﬁrst alter-

native parameter set given in the SI.

20%

G

GGGGGGG

10%

0%

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

A

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

50%

B

1.2

Fiscal Year

45% payline or

lottery line

15% payline or

lottery line

Investigator's ROI

40%

1.0

Benefit or cost

0.8

30%

0.6

FIG. S1.

Funding rates of NIH R01 and equivalents from

FY 1962 – FY 2016.


## Data from FY 1962 – 2008 include


R01, R23, R29, and R37 proposals, as reported by NIH’s

Oﬃce of Extramural Research [34].

1962 – 1969 data are

NIH estimates. Data for FY 2009 – 2016 include R01 and

R37 proposals, as reported by [2]. (R01 and R37 provide the

vast majority of proposals for earlier years.)


## Data include


new applications, supplements, and renewals, and the success

rate is calculated as the number of proposals funded divided

by the number of proposals reviewed.

20%

0.4

10%

0.2

0.0

0%

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Proposal strength (x)

Quantile of scientific value

FIG. S4. Parallel results to Fig. 2, except with the second

alternative parameter set.

Avg. scientific value or waste

Scientific gain or loss

per funded proposal

per funded proposal

value

waste, v0 = 0

waste, v0 = 0.25

v0 = 0

v0 = 0.25

0.25

0.9

0.20

0.15

0.8

0.10

0.7

0.05

0.00

0.6

10%

30%

50%

A

B

−0.05

10%

30%

50%

Payline or lottery line

FIG. S5. Parallel results to Fig. 3, except with the ﬁrst alter-

native parameter set given in the SI. Note that the vertical

axis in panel A does not extend to 0.

θ = 10

A

θ = 5

B

1.0

1.0

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

Avg. scientific value or waste

Scientific gain or loss

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.8

0.8

G

Assessed quantile

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

per funded proposal

per funded proposal

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

GG

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.4

G

G

0.6

G

0.6

G

G

G

G

value

waste, v0 = 0

waste, v0 = 0.25

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

v0 = 0

v0 = 0.25

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

1.0

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

GG

G

G

G

GG

G

G

G

0.3

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.4

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.4

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.2

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.8

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

GG

0.2

G

G

G

G

0.2

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

GG

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.1

G

G

G

GG

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G G

GG

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G G

G

0.0

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.0

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

0.6

G

G

G

G

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

20%

60%

100%

A

B

−0.1

0.4

Actual quantile

20%

60%

100%

Payline or lottery line

FIG. S2.

Random samples from copula distributions used

to model error in assessment of grant proposals. A: Clayton

copula with θ = 10. B: Clayton copula with θ = 5. Blue

dashed lines give the median of the assessed quantile as a

function of the actual quantile.

FIG. S6. Parallel results to Fig. 3, except with the second

alternative parameter set given in the SI. In this ﬁgure, data

are shown for paylines ranging from p = 0.001 to p = 0.999.

Note that the vertical axis in panel A does not extend to 0.



15

1.2

A

benefit, p = 45%

benefit, p = 15%

cost

200%

B

1.0

45% payline or

lottery line

15% payline or

lottery line

Investigator's ROI

150%

Benefit or cost

0.8

0.6

100%

0.4

50%

0.2

0.0

0%

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Proposal strength (x)

Quantile of scientific value

FIG. S7. Parallel results to Fig. 2, except with perfect as-

sessment of grant quality. All other parameter values are the

same as in Fig. 2.

Avg. scientific value or waste

Scientific gain or loss

per funded proposal

per funded proposal

0.3

1.2

value

waste, v0 = 0

waste, v0 = 0.25

v0 = 0

v0 = 0.25

0.2

1.0

0.1

0.8

0.0

0.6

−0.1

10%

30%

50%

A

B

−0.2

0.4

10%

30%

50%

Payline or lottery line

FIG. S8. Parallel results to Fig. 3, except with perfect assess-

ment of proposal strength. All other parameter values are the

same as in Fig. 3. Note that the vertical axis in panel A does

not extend to 0.

Avg. scientific value or waste

Scientific gain or loss

per funded proposal

per funded proposal

value

waste, v0 = 0

waste, v0 = 0.25

v0 = 0

v0 = 0.25

0.25

0.8

0.20

0.7

0.15

0.10

0.6

0.05

0.5

0.00

10%

30%

50%

A

B

−0.05

0.4

10%

30%

50%

Lottery line

FIG. S9. Parallel results to Fig. 3 for a three-tier lottery with

equally sized tiers and a 3:2:1 ratio of funding probabilities

across the tiers. The horizontal axis gives the proportion of

proposals that qualify for any tier of the lottery. Scientiﬁc

value and scientiﬁc waste per funded proposal are independent

of the actual payline, as long as the payline is less than 2/3 of

the lottery line. (If the payline exceeds 2/3 of the lottery line,

then the ratios of funding across tiers will be something other

than 3:2:1, and thus the average value and average cost of

a funded proposal will change slightly.) All other parameter

values are the same as in Fig. 3. Note that the vertical axis

in panel A does not extend to 0.