Novelty-based Generalization Evaluation for Trafﬁc

Light Detection

Arvind Kumar Shekar∗, Laureen Lake∗, Liang Gou† and Liu Ren†

∗Robert Bosch GmbH Stuttgart, Germany

† Robert Bosch Research and Technology Center, California, USA

∗ﬁrst.lastname@de.bosch.com, †ﬁrst.lastname@us.bosch.com

not conform with the general properties of the majority of the

training samples and are present in the low density regions

of the training dataset. Therefore, the anomalous samples are

not to be confused with mislabelled data. The terms outlier

and novelty detection are synonymous to each other because

they both detect samples that are anomalous. In fact, few

works categorize both outlier and novelty detection as anomaly

detection [28] and outlier detection methods have been applied

for novelty detection in several cases [6], [9], [17], [20], [24].

The underlying difference between them lies in the step that

follows detection. The former aims at eliminating the detected

anomalies, whereas the latter aims to identify new samples

(w.r.t. a normal dataset) from the data [23]. Although the

occurrence of novel samples may be infrequent in comparison

to regular samples, evaluating the CNNs performance on them

is not a trivial task [24]. Such evaluations are important in

AD applications to understand the limitations of a CNN prior

to deployment. Nevertheless, the major challenge for novelty-

based generalization is the magnitude of the AD datasets,

i.e., they consist of several thousands of images with multiple

objects. Evaluating the novelty of each image in the test dataset

w.r.t. all training images based on manually deﬁned properties,

e.g., brightness, blurriness, is tedious [16], [27].

We address this challenge by using the representation

learning method, i.e., Variational Auto-encoders (VAE) [5], to

extract the key features of the dataset, i.e., latent dimensions.

Given a dataset of size N × H × W × C×, where N is the

number of images, H is its height, W is its width and C

is the number of channels, the VAE reduces this to a N × d

space, where d is the number of latent dimensions. It is on this

low-dimensional latent representations we perform our novelty

assessment. By this way, we avoid the need to perform and

one-to-one comparison between the train and test data. Finally,

we score the generalization of a CNN by rewarding its ability

to perform well on the high novel samples. Few existing works

apply representation learning, e.g., Auto Encoders (AE), to

identify novel samples based on the reconstruction errors [7].

However, over several iterations AE reduces the reconstruction

error of the novel samples as well and may not be directly

applicable for novelty estimation [2]. Hence, we use them

only as a dimensionality reduction framework. We prefer a

VAE instead of an AE because the representations of an AE

are not continuous. Whereas in case of a VAE, the latent

representation being mean value of a distribution can be varied


## Abstract—The


advent

of

Convolutional

Neural

Networks

(CNNs) has led to their application in several domains. One

noteworthy application is the perception system for autonomous

driving that relies on the predictions from CNNs. Practitioners

evaluate the generalization ability of such CNNs by calculating

various metrics on an independent test dataset. A test dataset

is often chosen based on only one precondition, i.e., its elements

are not a part of the training data. Such a dataset may contain

objects that are both similar and novel w.r.t. the training dataset.

Nevertheless, existing works do not reckon the novelty of the test

samples and treat them all equally for evaluating generalization.

Such novelty-based evaluations are of signiﬁcance to validate the

ﬁtness of a CNN in autonomous driving applications. Hence, we

propose a CNN generalization scoring framework that considers

novelty of objects in the test dataset. We begin with the

representation learning technique to reduce the image data into a

low-dimensional space. It is on this space we estimate the novelty

of the test samples. Finally, we calculate the generalization score

as a combination of the test data prediction performance and

novelty. We perform an experimental study of the same for our

trafﬁc light detection application. In addition, we systematically

visualize the results for an interpretable notion of novelty.

arXiv:2201.00531v1  [cs.CV]  3 Jan 2022

I. INTRODUCTION

In recent times, machine learning models are increasingly

deployed for several real-world applications [27]. This has led

to the development of several Convolutional Neural Network

(CNN) architectures. It is a common practise to compare the

CNNs based on their generalization ability. Generalization in

computer vision and machine learning is deﬁned as "the ability

of image and video processing algorithms such as object

detectors or classiﬁers to perform well not only on the dataset

they are trained on, but also on novel data [11]." Hence, the

generalization of the developed networks are based on their

performance on a test dataset that is independent of the training


## data [15]. However, such an independent dataset is often


chosen randomly. A random selection does not ensure that the

test subset has novel samples. In AD application, we acquire


## data from several video streams at regular intervals [27]. In


principle every image in the stream is independent from the

training dataset. However, for generalization evaluation it is

necessary to gauge the network’s performance on novel images

that the network did not see during the training. Hence, we

introduce a second criterion, i.e., novelty of the objects in the

image, to weigh the network’s performance.

Given a training dataset, a test sample is deemed novel when

they are anomalous w.r.t. it [9]. Such anomalous samples do



to understand the physical meaning of that dimension. This

property is essential for human interpretation of novelty [14].

Existing works target on enhancing the CNN generalization

during the training process by regulating several factors such

as number of training iterations, learning rate, batch size

and regularization [13], [15], [31]. But to the best of our

knowledge, there are no existing KPIs (Key Performance

Indicator) that quantify the generalization ability of a fully

trained CNN.

In this work, we propose a two step framework to quantify

the generalization ability of a CNN. In the ﬁrst step we reduce

the dimensionality of the training and test dataset using a VAE.

In the second step we estimate the novelty of a test sample

by evaluating its likelihood that it belongs to the training data.

Finally, the prediction performance of a CNN on a given test

sample is weighted by the novelty of the test sample to obtain a

single generalization score. Moreover to ensure interpretability

of the novelty scorer, we visualize its results and present a

more human-understandable notion of novelty. The primary

contributions of this work are,

is an advantage. Similarly, Lightweight Online Detector of

Anomalies (LODA) [25] uses an ensemble of one-dimensional

histograms for novelty detection. The work of [23] applies

it for novelty detection in data streams. The work of [9]

uses LSTM-AE to reduce the discrete sequences into latent

representations. During testing, the test data samples are

reduced into the latent representations and fed as input to the

Isolation Forest [19]. The Isolation Forest is advantageous as

they are unsupervised and isolate the novel data points without

the need of normal data.

Unlike the straightforward AE reconstruction error based

novelty scorer [7], the work of [2] introduces likelihood of a

test sample in addition. Similarly, the work of [1] applies a

likelihood ratio test for evaluating the novelty of the video

sequences based on predeﬁned normal data. The q-space

novelty detection method [29] proposes several novelty scoring


## methods using the VAE latent feature and original space.


One of them quantiﬁes novelty by estimating the likelihood

of a test sample belonging to the modeled latent space

distribution of the normal data. In contrast to aforementioned


## methods, we apply the novelty detection on image datasets in


the context of CNN generalization evaluation. Moreover, we

experimentally present a systematic performance comparison

of various novelty scoring approaches. Secondly, we do not use

the AE reconstruction error as a novelty score and rather use

VAE only for dimensionality reduction. Although, we estimate

novelty based on likelihood of the test sample as done in the

work of [2], we additionally visualize novelty on the latent and

the image space. That is, we provide an interpretable notion

of novelty rather than mere reporting of scores.

• A generalization scoring measure based on representation

learning and novelty detection algorithm.

• Performance comparison of various novelty detection

algorithms from different paradigms.

• Generalization evaluation experiments on different CNN

architectures for trafﬁc light detection problem in the AD

domain.

• Interpretation of novelty using the latent representations

learnt by the VAE.

II. RELATED WORK

III. OUR FRAMEWORK

Novelty

detection

literature

is

broadly

grouped

into

classiﬁcation,

e.g.,

One-Class

Support

Vector

Machines

(OCSVM), Nearest Neighbor, e.g., Local outlier factor (LOF),

clustering, e.g., k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) and statistical

based approaches, e.g., Histogram-based outlier score [4],

[12], [21], [24], [26]. The works of [20], [24] provide a

brief summary about the novelty scoring taxonomies and

algorithms. As the scoring algorithms suffer from the curse-

of-dimensionality, it is often preceded by a feature extraction

or dimensionality reduction step [8].

As a classiﬁcation-based approach, the work of [6] applies

OCSVM for monitoring novel patterns in sensor data. They

ﬁrstly extract statistical features from various sensors, which

are then passed on to OCSVM for novelty scoring. Instead of

feature extraction, the work of [18] performs dimensionality

reduction using Principal Component Analysis [13] before

using OCSVM. Likewise, the work of [17] extracts the word

usage patterns from documents to score the novelty of patents

using LOF [4]. The work of [21] uses kNN novelty detection

on data streams to learn the boundary of the training data.

The test sample novelty is based on its distance from the

trained boundary. Histogram based outlier score (HBOS)

is a simple combination of uni-variate methods applied to

multiple dimensions [12]. Although, they do not account for

dependence between variables, its efﬁciency on large datasets

Fig. 1: Our generalization framework

Our generalization evaluation framework involves three

phases,

viz.,

pre-processing,

representation

learning

and

novelty scoring. We explain each of them using trafﬁc light

(TL) localization CNN from our Autonomous Driving (AD)

application. Our framework aims to score the generalization

ability of the trained trafﬁc light detectors. Given a trafﬁc

scenario image for the task of TL detection, it contains several

irrelevant information or objects and evaluating their pixel-

wise novelty is inefﬁcient and less insightful. Hence, similar to



the work of [14], we start with the pre-processing phase where

the objects of interest, i.e., trafﬁc lights, are cropped from

the train and test datasets. On one hand, the pre-processing

phase reduced the size of the images by targeting the object-

of-interest I. On the other hand, pre-processing phase will

increase the number of images because each trafﬁc scenario

may have more than one TL object and each of them is

extracted as a separate image. For example, the Bosch Small

Trafﬁc light dataset and the subset of DriveU dataset we use

has ≈10k and 50k trafﬁc lights in the training data [3], [10].

Hence, we pass the TL crops to the representation learning

phase to train a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) (c.f. Figure

1 a ).

The VAE comprises of an encoder, a d-dimensional

bottleneck layer and a decoder which mirrors the encoder.

Using the training data, its objective is to learn a d-dimensional

latent distributions by optimizing a set of parameters φ based

on the KL-divergence and reconstruction loss. Each dimension

is deﬁned by a mean µ and standard deviation σ . Hence, a

fully trained encoder eφ is capable of mapping a TL crop to d

mean and standard deviation values. For deeper understanding

of VAE, readers may refer to the original work [5]. We use the

mean value as a low-dimensional representation of the trafﬁc

light crop I, eφ : I 7→µ | |µ| = d. These representations hold

the key properties of the RGB images in a compressed form.

For example, we project the d-dimensional µ vector (d = 32)

into a 2-dimensional space using UMAP [22] and DriveU data

in Figure 2. The ﬁrst observation is that the µ values cluster

themselves based on the color of the lights. Although this work

focuses on TL detection and not classiﬁcation, with Figure 2

we intend to emphasize that the lights of same color may

have different properties. That is, each color cluster has both

dense and sparse regions. Given a new test image, our target

is to compress it to the d-dimensional µ vector and score its

novelty w.r.t. the training data. For the sake of completeness,

we trained a simple AE over the same dataset. However, we

did not observe such clustering of the samples based on colors.

Moreover, its latent dimensions were challenging to interpret.

Whereas, to understand a latent dimension of a VAE we

traversed through the learnt distribution to observe the change

in the reconstructed image.

The encoder eφ is capable of transforming the train and

test images into a low-dimensional mean vectors (c.f. Figure

1 a and b ). Given N training and

¯N test images, it is

transformed into Z ∈RN,d and ¯Z ∈R ¯

N,d respectively. We

train a novelty scorer using the Z matrix and score the novelty

of each test sample in ¯Z (c.f. Figure 1 c and d respectively).

After calculating the novelty score for each TL crop, the next

step is to pass the full images (un-cropped) to the TL detector

CNN (c.f. Figure 1 e ). Just as the novelty scorer assigned a

score for each TL crop nov_sc : (I, eφ) 7→novelty ∈R, each

CNN prediction is assigned with a conﬁdence score s ∈R.

A prediction is either a true positive, i.e., the predicted box ˆy

overlaps the ground truth box y with an IoU greater than 0.5,

or a false positive if otherwise. In the case of a false negative,

we assign that object I a conﬁdence of 0. Since the false

Red

Green

Yellow

Red yellow

Off

UMAP dimension 2

UMAP dimension 1

Fig. 2: 2-dimensional representation of the VAE µ vector using

DriveU dataset

positives do not have a novelty score, we do not use it for the

generalization scoring. As a network performance measure, we

calculate the loss L : (y, ˆy, s)R for each detection.

Overall, each TL crop now has a novelty score and

a performance score in the form of a loss value. Our

generalization score rewards a low loss for highly novel

objects by calculating a novelty weighted average of the loss

G =

PN

i=1 noveltyi·(1−L(yi,ˆyi,si))

PN

i=1 noveltyi

. That is, a loss value of a

highly novel sample is weighted higher than that of less novel

sample. However, it is worth mentioning that we do no ignore

the less novel samples. Rather, we only weigh them lower

in comparison to the highly novel samples. Therefore, our

generalization score is a combination of both high and low

novel samples but aggregated with different weights.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATIONS

As mentioned in Section III we use two well-known

TL datasets, i.e., BSTLD and DriveU for the experimental

evaluations. We instantiate the L with Mean Absolute Error

(MAE) because it has ﬁxed upper and lower-bounds [0, 1].

Our evaluation targets to, (a) compare various novelty scoring

algorithms that ﬁts our application, (b) evaluate usefulness of

the proposed generalization score G and (c) interpret the notion

of novelty for the datasets. We extracted the TL crops from

both datasets to train the VAE for 750 epochs, with a batch

size of 64, a learning rate of 0.0001, d=32 and β = 0.1.

A. Comparative study

The novelty scorer for the TL objects (crops) is an

important part of our generalization framework (c.f. Figure 1

in step c and d ). In this section we perform a comparative

evaluation of existing methods to identify a scorer that best

ﬁts our application. For this, we select seven novelty scoring

algorithms from various paradigms (c.f. Section II). As we

do not have the ground truth novelty scores for the study, we

systematically engineer the datasets for our experiment. First

we choose a contamination color, e.g., green TLs, which is

removed from the train dataset. We engineer the test dataset

such that it contains 10% of the contamination color and 90%



Kernel density

Contamination=Red/


## Data=DriveU


Contamination=Green

/Data=BSTLD

PCA

LODA

HBOS

OCSVM

Isolation forest

LOF

(a) Effect of dropout regularization using SSD (inception) and

BSTLD dataset

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Avg. ROC score

Fig. 3: Novelty algorithms comparative study

of the other colors. The contamination color samples are novel

w.r.t. training data in this context because all contamination

color samples were intentionally removed from the training


## dataset. We aim to compare the ability of different novelty


scoring algorithms to identify these samples in the test dataset.

We use the implementation from PyOD and scikit-learn in our

evaluation [30] and the area under ROC curve as a quality

metric for our evaluation. As a randomness component is

involved in our experiment, we perform the contamination

sampling three times and show the standard deviation and

average ROC.

In Figure 3, we show the results on BSTLD [3] and

DriveU [10] dataset with green and red as contamination

colors respectively. Amidst the chosen scorers, LOF was

the best performing (largest ROC score), followed by the

KDE. However, with increase in the number of contamination

(novel) samples, we observed that number false positives

(normal samples identiﬁed as novel) increased more for LOF

in comparison to KDE (see supplementary material 1). For this

reason, we prefer to use KDE as the novelty scorer for our

further experiments. The density score of KDE is inversely

proportional to novelty and it may have negative values. We

normalise the density scores such that they are proportional to

novelty and non-negative values.1.

(b) Effect of training iterations using BSTLD dataset

(c) Effect of batch size using BSTLD dataset

B. Generalization comparison for TL detector

In this section we show the inﬂuence of the novelty scores

on CNN generalization ability. However, we do not have

a ground truth generalization score for benchmarking. For

this reason, we use various factors from the existing works

that are known to control the network’s generalization ability,

e.g., dropout rate, number of training iterations, batch size

and learning rate. As the object-under-test we chose three

CNN architectures, SSD and FRCNN with inception V2

backbone and SSD with mobilnet backbone. We follow the

same evaluation method as in Section IV-A, except that we

deﬁne the contamination samples based on the novelty and not

TL colors. After scoring each TL object with a novelty score

using KDE, we bin the test data into high, medium and low

(d) Effect of learning rate using DriveU dataset and SSD

inception v2

Fig. 4: Effect of various factors on the loss function

1Supplementary material: https://ﬁgshare.com/s/2613fa8fddad96895a6f



from Figure 4d we observe that the SSD with learning rate

0.0006 and 0.0012 performed similar with increasing novelty.

However, the SSD with the learning rate of 0.0003 shows

comparatively larger loss with increasing novelty. Hence, the

increase in learning rate does improve generalization, i.e.,

lower loss. However, setting the learning rate to extreme values

will negatively affect the learning process. Although we used

manual thresholds to bin the samples into high, medium and

low novel samples (c.f. Figure 4), our generalization score

does not require it. The novelty scores are used directly as

weights for the G score computation.

Conventionally the generalization of a CNN is evaluated

based

on

test


## data


accuracy.

Hence

we

compare

our

generalization score G alongside test data accuracy. For this,

we trained the SSDs at different learning rates on the two


## datasets separately. As we performed the learning rate analysis


with loss values on DriveU dataset in Figure 4d, we show

the results on BSTLD in Figure 5. From the ﬁrst look we

observe that our generalization score follows the test data

accuracy well. However, we demonstrate that our scoring is

more insightful by including the novelty of the test objects

with an additional experiment. As mentioned in Section III

test data accuracy is computed based on IoU between ground

truth and predicted boxes. Using this as a generalization scorer

we infer that the SSD generalizes better on BSTLD dataset

(c.f. Table I). However, in general we observed that the loss

values of FRCNN detector are smaller in comparison to the

SSD. Especially on high novel samples the average loss values

of SSD was 0.59, whereas that of FRCNN was 0.46. Our G

score rewards this property to score FRCNN better than the

SSD.

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0.3

2.3

4.3

6.3

8.3

Learning rate x 10-3

Test data accuracy

Generalization score

Fig. 5: Test data accuracy vs. our generalization score (all samples

in BSTLD)


## Dataset


Network

Accuracy

G

BSTLD

SSD

0.65

0.23

FRCNN

0.6

0.33

DriveU

SSD

0.25

0.13

FRCNN

0.5

0.44

TABLE I: Test data accuracy vs. our generalization score (subset of

BSTLD data with equal number of low/medium/high samples)

novel samples. Like outliers, novel samples are also infrequent

in a dataset. To avoid the results being dominated by low novel

samples, we sample 100 images from each novelty bin.

In Figure 4a we evaluate the contribution of dropout

regularization to generalize on novel samples. In general, with

increasing dropout rate we observe that the test loss of the

SSDs were smaller, i.e., regularization positively contributes

for the generalization. Speciﬁcally, the dropout rates of 30%

and 50% starts almost at the same loss values when the data

is dominated by low novel samples. However, with increasing

high novel samples the SSD with 50% drop out rate has lower

loss in comparison to the other, i.e., it generalizes better.

To further emphasize the importance of novelty we present

experiments that exhibited similar trend, i.e., having similar

loss on the low novel samples but increasing loss over

increase in novelty. For example, in Figure 4b we observe

that the FRCNN detector with 50k and 20k iterations has

a similar loss when the test dataset predominantly has less

novel samples. However, the loss of FRCNN trained with

50k iterations increased steeply with increasing novelty. One

possible explanation is that the model was over-ﬁtting the train


## data in comparison to the FRCNN with 20k iterations.


Batch

size

and

network’s

generalization

ability

are

negatively correlated, whereas learning rate and generalization

ability are positively correlated [15]. From Figure 4c we infer

the same. For instance, the SSD mobilnet of large batch size (7

and 9) shows a steep increase in the CNN loss as the number

of novel samples increases. On contrary, the SSD with batch

size 5 has a more stable or constant loss. However, this was

not true for all networks, e.g., SSD inception with a batch size

of 1 performed worse than batch size 5. On the other hand,

C. Interpretation of novelty

In the previous sections, we use the word novelty to describe

objects that are anomalous w.r.t. the training dataset. However,

in practical applications the user needs to interpret novelty to

further enrich the dataset or improve the CNN architecture.

Therefore, in this section we aim to understand the latent

dimensions because KDE scores the novelty based on these

dimensions. Instead of visualizing all the d-dimensions, we

used mutual information [14] to select dimensions that best

classiﬁes the samples into high and low novelty categories.

Therefore, we analyse only the dimensions that strongly

inﬂuence the novelty of objects. In Figure 6 and 7 we visualize

the traversal (low to high values) of the inﬂuential dimensions

on BSTLD and DriveU datasets respectively. We understand

that the dimensions represent various human-interpretable

properties of the image like brightness, color shade, inlay or

the bulb size.

In Figure 8 and 9 we map the data samples and the traversals

using parallel coordinates. Although we trained the detector

for localization and not classiﬁcation, we evaluate class-

wise novelty as we found them to be more straightforward.

However, the scoring was done over all colors at one shot

and not class-wise. In Figure 8 we show the green and red

TL samples of BSTLD dataset. We infer that dimension z9



(a) z9 controls the size of the trafﬁc light bulb

(b) z2 controls the background brightness

(c) z19 controls the trafﬁc light inlay

Fig. 6: Traversal of VAE latent dimensions trained on BSTLD dataset

(a) z10 controls the white spot on the green trafﬁc light

(b) z5 controls the shades of yellow color light

(c) z20 controls the shade of red color light

(d) z23 controls the blurriness of the red yellow light

Fig. 7: Traversal of VAE latent dimensions trained on DriveU dataset

inﬂuences the novelty of green lights, i.e., smaller values of

z9 are scored as high novel samples. From our traversal study

on z9 in Figure 6a we interpret that it controls the size of

the light bulb. That is, the z9 is inversely proportional to the

bulb size or the training data has more of smaller trafﬁc lights.

This leads to the KDE assigning larger lights as more novel

objects. The z2 dimension is commonly inﬂuencing the novelty

in green and red lights, from Figure 6b we understand that it

controls the background brightness. The novelty scorer assigns

the TLs with bright background as more novel. Similarly, for

Fig. 9: Visualization of sample novelty based on KDE density scores

for green, red-yellow, red and yellow trafﬁc lights in DriveU dataset

red TLs in Figure 8 we observe that smaller values of z19

are more novel. The dimension z19 controls the inlay, as we

increase the value from left to right the image changes from

a left facing arrow to red circled inlay (c.f. Figure 6c). From

the perspective of human-interpretation, this means that the

training dataset had fewer arrow inlays compared to the circle

inlays.

Likewise, the interpretation study on the DriveU dataset for

four different TL colors shows that novelty increases with

increase in z10 or z5 (c.f. Figure 9). On contrary, the novelty

of samples increase with the decrease of z20 and z23. From

Figure 9a, we understand that z10 controls the trafﬁc light size

and also the bright spot around it. These large TLs with such

glaring white spots are deemed novel by the KDE. The z5

Fig. 8: Visualization of sample novelty based on KDE density scores

for green (top) and red (bottom) trafﬁc lights in BSTLD dataset



dimension controls the shade of yellow, as we traversed to

higher values we observed that the color was much darker,

i.e., it tends to look more red in color, and it grew in size (c.f.

Figure 9b). The z20 dimension regulates the shade of red light

color and z23 controls the blurriness of the lights (c.f. Figure

9c and 9d respectively).

[10] A. Fregin, J. Müller, U. Krebetael, and K. Dietmayer.

The driveu

trafﬁc light dataset: Introduction and comparison with existing datasets.

In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation

(ICRA), pages 3376–3383, May 2018. 3, 4

[11] Kevin Fritz, Daniel König, Ulrich Klauck, and Michael Teutsch.

Generalization ability of region proposal networks for multispectral

person detection. In Automatic Target Recognition XXIX, volume 10988,

page 109880Y. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019. 1

[12] Markus Goldstein and Andreas Dengel. Histogram-based outlier score

(hbos): A fast unsupervised anomaly detection algorithm.

KI-2012:

Poster and Demo Track, pages 59–63, 2012. 2

[13] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.

Deep learning, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 2016. 2

[14] Liang Gou, Lincan Zou, Nanxiang Li, Michael Hofmann, Arvind Kumar

Shekar, Axel Wendt, and Liu Ren. VATLD: A visual analytics system

to assess, understand and improve trafﬁc light detection. IEEE Trans.

Vis. Comput. Graph., 27(2):261–271, 2021. 2, 3, 5

[15] Fengxiang He, Tongliang Liu, and Dacheng Tao. Control batch size and

learning rate to generalize well: Theoretical and empirical evidence. In

H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and

R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,

volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. 1, 2, 5

[16] M. Johanson, S. Belenki, J. Jalminger, M. Fant, and M. Gjertz. Big

automotive data: Leveraging large volumes of data for knowledge-driven

product development. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big


## Data (Big Data), pages 736–741, 2014. 1


[17] Changyong Lee, Bokyoung Kang, and Juneseuk Shin. Novelty-focused

patent mapping for technology opportunity analysis.

Technological

Forecasting and Social Change, 90:355–365, 2015. 1, 2

[18] Heng Lian. On feature selection with principal component analysis for

one-class svm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 33(9):1027–1031, 2012. 2

[19] Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In

2008 eighth ieee international conference on data mining, pages 413–


## 422. IEEE, 2008. 2


[20] Markos Markou and Sameer Singh. Novelty detection: a review—part

1: statistical approaches. Signal processing, 83(12):2481–2497, 2003.

1, 2

[21] Mohammad Masud, Jing Gao, Latifur Khan, Jiawei Han, and Bhavani M

Thuraisingham.

Classiﬁcation and novel class detection in concept-

drifting data streams under time constraints.

IEEE Transactions on

Knowledge and Data Engineering, 23(6):859–874, 2010. 2

[22] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville.

Umap: Uniform

manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018. 3

[23] Shon Mendelson and Boaz Lerner. Online cluster drift detection for

novelty detection in data streams.

In 2020 19th IEEE International

Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pages

171–178. IEEE, 2020. 1, 2

[24] Dubravko Miljkovi´c. Review of novelty detection methods. In The 33rd

International Convention MIPRO, pages 593–598. IEEE, 2010. 1, 2

[25] Tomáš Pevn`y. Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies. Machine

Learning, 102(2):275–304, 2016. 2

[26] Bernhard Schölkopf, Robert C Williamson, Alexander J Smola, John

Shawe-Taylor, John C Platt, et al. Support vector method for novelty

detection. In NIPS, volume 12, pages 582–588. Citeseer, 1999. 2

[27] Arvind Kumar Shekar, Liang Gou, Liu Ren, and Axel Wendt. Label-free

robustness estimation of object detection cnns for autonomous driving

applications. Int. J. Comput. Vis., 129(4):1185–1201, 2021. 1

[28] Swee Chuan Tan, Kai Ming Ting, and Tony Fei Liu.

Fast anomaly

detection for streaming data.

In Twenty-Second International Joint

Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2011. 1

[29] Aleksei Vasilev, Vladimir Golkov, Marc Meissner, Ilona Lipp, Eleonora

Sgarlata, Valentina Tomassini, Derek K Jones, and Daniel Cremers. q-

space novelty detection with variational autoencoders. In Computational

Diffusion MRI, pages 113–124. Springer, 2020. 2

[30] Yue Zhao, Zain Nasrullah, and Zheng Li. Pyod: A python toolbox for

scalable outlier detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01588, 2019. 4

[31] Qinghe Zheng, Mingqiang Yang, Jiajie Yang, Qingrui Zhang, and Xinxin

Zhang. Improvement of generalization ability of deep cnn via implicit

regularization in two-stage training process.

IEEE Access, 6:15844–

15869, 2018. 2

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The ﬁtness of the CNN depends on its ability to perform

well on unseen data. However, existing works deﬁne unseen


## data as only the data not involved in the training. Such


oversimpliﬁed deﬁnition of test data does not hold well for

applications such as autonomous driving where we have

streams of data from multiple sources. In this work we

introduced the idea of scoring the generalization performance

of CNN based on the sample’s novelty w.r.t. the training


## data. We demonstrated its usefulness in trafﬁc light detection


application for autonomous driving domain. Moreover, we

experimentally compared various novelty scoring algorithm

that ﬁts for our application. In addition to our experimental

evaluations on two datasets and CNN architectures, we use

visualization methods to help users interpret the notion of

novelty.

In

this

work,

we

evaluated

the

framework

for

TL

applications which have standard shapes. However, evaluating

the framework on non-standard shapes like pedestrian or

vehicles is still an open challenge that we intend to pursue

as future work.


## REFERENCES


[1] Fabrizio Angiulli, Rachel Ben-Eliyahu-Zohary, and Luigi Palopoli.

Outlier detection for simple default theories.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence,

174(15):1247–1253, 2010. 2

[2] Laura Beggel, Michael Pfeiffer, and Bernd Bischl.

Robust anomaly

detection in images using adversarial autoencoders. In Machine Learning

and Knowledge Discovery in Databases - European Conference, ECML

PKDD 2019, Würzburg, Germany, September 16-20, 2019, Proceedings,

Part I, volume 11906, pages 206–222. Springer, 2019. 1, 2

[3] Karsten Behrendt, Libor Novak, and Rami Botros.

A deep learning

approach to trafﬁc lights: Detection, tracking, and classiﬁcation.

In

Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference

on, pages 1370–1377. IEEE, 2017. 3, 4

[4] Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T Ng, and Jörg

Sander. Lof: identifying density-based local outliers. In Proceedings

of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of


## data, pages 93–104, 2000. 2


[5] Christopher P Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick

Watters, Guillaume Desjardins, and Alexander Lerchner. Understanding

disentangling in β-vae. 2018. 1, 3

[6] J. A. Carino, D. Zurita, A. Picot, M. Delgado, J. A. Ortega, and

R. J. Romero-Troncoso.

Novelty detection methodology based on

multi-modal one-class support vector machine.

In 2015 IEEE 10th

International Symposium on Diagnostics for Electrical Machines, Power

Electronics and Drives (SDEMPED), pages 184–190, 2015. 1, 2

[7] Zhaomin Chen, Chai Kiat Yeo, Bu Sung Lee, and Chiew Tong Lau.

Autoencoder-based network anomaly detection.

In 2018 Wireless

Telecommunications Symposium (WTS), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2018. 1, 2

[8] Xuemei Ding, Yuhua Li, Ammar Belatreche, and Liam P Maguire. An

experimental evaluation of novelty detection methods. Neurocomputing,

135:313–327, 2014. 2

[9] Rémi Domingues, Pietro Michiardi, Jérémie Barlet, and Maurizio

Filippone.

A comparative evaluation of novelty detection algorithms

for discrete sequences. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, pages 1–26, 2019.

1, 2