The Impact of Social Media in Learning and

Teaching: A Bibliometric-based Citation Analysis

A. K. Shaikh, S. Ali and R. Al-Maamari

Department of Information Systems, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman,

shaikh@squ.edu.om, saqib@squ.edu.om, u111514@student.squ.edu.om

*Abstract – This paper presents the results of a systematic review of the literature on the

impact of social media in learning and teaching through bibliometric-based Citation


## analysis. The objective of the review was to map the evolution of the current literature


and identify the leading sources of knowledge in terms of the most influential journals,

authors, and articles. From a total of 50 top most relevant articles, selected from the

Scopus database, a detailed citation analysis was conducted. The study explored the

overall theoretical foundation of social media research involving in learning and

studying; and identified the leading sources of knowledge in terms of the most

inﬂuential journals, authors, and papers; and revealed research trends over the last four

years by citation analysis. The analysis of citation data showed that “International

Journal of Management Education” is the leading journal in social media in learning

and teaching research. Author “Abdullah Z.” was found to be the leading author in this

field in terms of a total number of publications, total citations, and h-index, while the

most cited article was authored by “Baaran S.” and by “Bapitha L.”. The contribution

of this study is to clearly outline the current state of knowledge regarding social media

in learning and teaching services in the literature.

Keywords: social media, teaching and learning, citation analysis, systematic


## literature review, social media.


* Corresponding Author: Abdul K. Shaikh, shaikh@squ.edu.om




## Introduction


Internet and social media have a significant impact on our daily life including our way

of learning and teaching. According to the latest smart insight report†, more than 53%

of the global populations are now connected via social media. Social media can

characterize as PC-interceded advancements that help the client to make and share

information, data, and different things through the system and virtual correspondence

[1]. To take the advantages of existing social media network and platforms, the teaching

and learning activities can be enhanced. This could be an opportunity c for colleges and

schools to apply social media in learning and teaching. To fulfil this gap, in this paper,

we use a bibliometric technique [19]  for comprehensive analysis of social media-related

articles, which have involvement in learning and studying in centralized control [20].

Bibliometric incorporates various techniques for the examination of data, for example,

bibliographic coupling utilizing citation, citation analysis, content analysis, and co-word

examination utilizing keywords [2, 3]. In this study, we use citation analysis. The

bibliometric investigation gives an understanding of the development of writing and the

progression of information inside a predefined field over some time by breaking down

the data accumulated in the database, for example, references, writers, keywords, or the

scope of journals [3].

The rest of the sections are outlined as: literature review section explores the overall

theoretical foundation of social media research involving learning and studying

including research questions and its motivation, followed by the section on research


## methodology and discussion section on the bibliometric results. The last section presents


the conclusion and the possible future research.


## Literature review


The literature review research method includes three actions: "planning, execution, and

reporting". Each of these actions are partitioned into further sub-actions. Planning

incorporates separating the remaining task to complete on a time and building up the

"retrieve protocol itself”. The planning action combines study questions and building

up the research technique, the consideration/avoidance measures, and the information

extraction structure. The execution action incorporates information recovery, study

choice, information extraction, and information blend. At last, the revealing actions

present and decipher the outcomes.

There are numerous collections of research periodicals accessible to look over in both

electronic (online) and physical (hard copy) format structure. This research limited to

†

https://www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-

strategy/new-global-social-media-research/



extract peer-reviewed journals from electronic (online) format available. The minimum

criteria to include SCOPUS indexed periodicals for this study.

Research questions and motivation

In this study, three research questions arise which help to clarify and motivate the

contribution of social media in learning and teaching through citation analysis.

RQ1. What is the impact of social media in teaching and learning which is investigated

by researchers?

RQ2. What application of social media is using more among students?

RQ3. What is the social media involvement in learning and studying research goals?

Research question 1, encourages the discovery of the different impacts of social media

in learning and studying either positive or negative. For the second question, the main

drive is to know which applications are more interesting for the students to use in

education. Further, the main inspiration of the third question is to figure out the vast

interest of research in this field and which areas might be under-contemplated:

investigating fundamental ideas, gathering information on current practices, or targeting

propelling practice through science plan. To answer the given research questions, 50

papers are classified on the work by Piattini, Genero, Poels, and Nelson [4].



Q1. What is the impact of social media on teaching and learning either positively or

negatively?

Social media refers to a wide range of applications in creating, sharing, commenting,

and discussing digital content. Other aspects of social media that are often overlooked

is the ability to transform education into a more social, open, and cooperative place [5].

Consistent with theoretical perspectives that are related to social media, there are many

studies and research that are providing empirical evidence on the impact of social media

in learning and teaching for students [6]. There are a large number of studies in this

field, that believe and agree that the use of social media has many benefits for students

[7-9],[10]. Such as increasing students’ collaboration, participation, forming a team

projects [7], sharing the most important information, and asking questions by using

social media platforms [11].  Social media enhances studying, learning and increases

studying demand. Some benefits are listed below:

Knowledge construction: In this aspect, we found many processes which are more

active such as, ask questions, exchange ideas, give opinions, share information and

resources. This knowledge construction is more responsible for the conversion process

in the social media environment.

Knowledge sharing: Teachers are using social media such as Facebook for sharing

knowledge and communicating with other people of similar thinking and reaching

multiple audiences.



Flexibility and accessibility: That means you can learn at any time and place from

the applications of social media. As many teachers and students use Twitter because it

is easier to use and easier to access [12].

Students want virtual office hours with their teachers: From the study found in

2013, students appreciate the opportunity to make virtual discussions with their teachers

during office hours to support their learning and increase flexible communication with

their teachers.

Many students are fluent in social media: Studies [3] revealed the use of the internet

between teenagers i.e., 77% of users are between 12 and 17 years, and 87% of users

between the age of 18 and 29. Also, it found that most users are using Facebook

applications for their learning

On the other hand, some studies are explaining the negative side of social media in

teaching and studying [13-15]. For example, many of the bloggers and writers post

wrong and inappropriate information on social media applications which leads the

education system to failure [13]. For more, most students misuse social media by

creating fake accounts for entertainment, and after that, they become addicted to it [11].

Some students aren't completely aware of the policies and terms that social platforms

are already using [11, 14]. Laura Rueda, Jose Benitez, and Jessica Braojos showed that

social media can also affect teaching activities, while some students dislike sharing their

ideas with their teachers through social media and face some distractions like games,

notifications about the video, advertisements, etc. [15].

Q2. What are the applications of social media used by students?

There are some studies that showed how social media tools can impact learning and

teaching [5, 16]. It can improve the performance of students in their studying, increase

their knowledge, easy ways for understanding their lessons [9], and a more active way

to connect with other students and teachers [16]. However, from the literature review,

other social media-enabled tools are explored. For example, Facebook is a popular

application among people, it can help students to generate information, references, and

make a group for students. Another popular application of social media is Instagram and

Twitter, which allow teachers and students to communicate and collaborate [17]. The

students also can be satisfied when using YouTube to see different videos about their

lectures than traditional ways in the classroom [5].

Q3. What is the social media involvement in learning and studying research goals?

The purpose of investigating the goals of the research papers is to determine where

social media involvement in studying and learning research interest lies and to

determine which areas may be under-studied. There are 18 papers (which represents

36% of the total) related to assuring the impact, 13 papers (26%) are related to evaluating

the impact, and 10 papers (20%) to measure the impact. The other two categories,



improving and understanding, together account for less than 10% of the papers.

Research on applied areas of the social media involvement in learning and studying

assurance techniques and the evaluation of the impact of social media in learning and

studying account for more than three-quarters (67.33%) of the papers published. This is

not surprising, as the impact of social media on learning and studying is a critically

important topic. This means that a given topic is understudied or that it has yet to find

acceptance with journals, or it may be that both of these states are the case for the topic

in question.



Research methodology

In this section, the research methodology is explained where the research selection

process and citation analysis were presented.

Research selection process

The first step in this section was to select papers from the Scopus database. The

papers that are selected are written in the English language. The document type was

determined as “journal articles” to maintain the quality. The keywords selected were

“Social media for studying” and “social media for sharing information” in the topic

section, using the advanced search function. In the first search, a total of 188 articles

relating to the use of social media involvement in learning and studying were selected.

Then, the study identified the relevancy of the topic whether it is relevant to social media

learning or teaching or not. Consequently, by excluding the irrelevant papers, 50 articles

were selected for analysis from different SCOPUS indexed peer-reviewed journals. The

citation analysis, therefore, covers published articles spanning the period 2017 to 2020.

Citation Analysis: It is a fact that there is a huge number of papers in every field.  So,

it became very difficult to understand and analyze the number of papers using traditional

tools. To address this challenge, the use of bibliometric analysis is a vital technique.

Citation analysis has become a very important and useful tool that provides a systematic


## analysis of a large number of earlier literature over time, comparing the relative impact


of most prolific authors, top journals, and highly cited papers [18].


## Results and discussion


The results of citation analysis are demonstrated into three categories: (1) the timeline

of citation, (2) the most effective papers in the field of social media involvement in

learning and teaching, and (3) the most influential and qualified authors.

The timeline of citation and publication: Figure 1 shows the average article

citations per year from 2017 to 2020. From Figure 1, in 2017 and 2018 there have been

many citations during these years. For more, in 2017 the average citations are 2.889 per



year. In 2018 the average number of citations is 4.35786 per year. The average citation

in 2019 was 4.35786 per year. But no records of citations in 2020.

Fig. 1 Average Article Citations per Year (2017-2020)

Fig. 2 Annual Publication Trend (2017-2020)

Figure 2 shows the annual publication trend from 2017 to 2020. According to Figure

2, the most articles published were in 2020, which means this issue has been

increasing more among the students in the particular year. In 2020, the annual

publication was 27 studies, whereas, 2019 about 11 studies, seven studies in 2018, and

six studies in 2017 were conducted respectively.

The most effective papers in the field of a social media impact learning and

studying: Many journal papers are written in the field of social media on learning and

studying efﬁciency. However, we identiﬁed the 8 most effective papers based on the

total number of citations, which are presented in Table 1. According to this, the top ﬁve

papers are “Social media as a complementary learning tool for teaching and learning:

the case of YouTube”, “Students wellbeing, fear of missing out and social media

engagement for leisure in higher education learning environments”, “Networked

scholarship, and motivations for social media use in scholarly communication”, “Social

teaching: student perspectives on the inclusion of social media in higher education”, and

“Uses and gratifications factors for social media use in teaching: instructors

perspectives”. These top 8 papers account for 15.32% of the total citations until 2020.



Social media as a complementary learning tool for teaching and learning: the case of

YouTube was the top-ranked paper, publishing 0.6% of the total number of papers (50

papers). This paper were cited 26 times, which corresponds to 5.6% of the total citations.

A potential issue with the comparison of total citations is that the newest papers have

less, or no citations compared to older papers. Likewise, some journals have published

more papers on a particular issue than other journals, and, as a result, they have

accumulated more citations. To account for this issue, another way of comparing the

journal rankings is to look at the average citations per year. The average citations per

year function take out the impact of “years since publication” and “number of papers”.

These papers received 6, 7, and 17 citations, respectively. The calculation of average

citations per year for this journal is shown in equation 1,

Per year citations (paper 1) = Total Citations / (2020 – 2017)   = 6 / 3 = 2                 (1)

Based on average per year citations, the top ﬁve journals have on average 8.667,

6.000, 4.250, 4.250, and 5.000 citations, respectively.

The most influential and qualified authors: This section will provide the most

impact and productive authors in the field of social media involvement in learning and

studying. For that, table 1 shows the top 8 most inﬂuential authors in order, which is

based on total citations. Also, it provides more detail about some metrics such as g-

index, h-index, m-index, and the number of publications to make comparisons between

the contribution and inﬂuence of each author. The top ﬁve authors based on total

citations are Abdullah Z, Adeniyi E.A., Agllias K., Aitchison C., and Ajamu G.J. While,

based on h-index, g-index, and m-index, approximately all authors on the same level.

The greatest number of citations done by Baaran S. is 26 and by Bapitha L. are also 26

citations.

This section discusses the results and comparative analysis of the total sample of 50

articles on social media involvement in studying and learning. The study is divided  into

five categories which are: (1) a summary of those characteristics in a geographical, (2)

time evolution of the published work in the field, (3) identification of the most

influential journal in the field, (4) identification of the most prolific author, and (5)

identification of the most influential paper in the field.

Basic summary of the selected articles: According to a geographic point of view,

there are many countries like North Korea, the USA, Nigeria, Malaysia, and Africa that

have shown more contribution in social media research than others. The one main reason

is, these countries have many advanced universities in technology. Also, many authors

are interested in this field because they know while using social media in university or

school has a lot of impact on learning and studying for the students either positively or

negatively.



Table 1 Top 8 Most effective papers in the field of how social media impact studying and teaching.

Paper Title

Publication

Total Citations

Average Citations per Year

(APY)

Number

%

Number

%

Rank1

Number

Rank 2

The use of social media (some)

as a learning tool in healthcare

86

4.3%

0

0.00%

12

0.000

12

education: an integrative review

of the literature.

Social media as a

complementary learning tool for

79

3.95%

26

3.6%

1

8.667

1

teaching and learning: the case

of YouTube.

Students’ wellbeing, fear of

missing out, and social media

51

2.55%

18

2.56%

2

6.000

6

engagement for leisure in higher

education learning

environments.

The best in disaster project:

analyzing and understanding

meaningful YouTube content,

34

1.7%

0

0.00%

13

13

0

dialogue, and commitment as

part of responsible management

education.

Social media for teaching and

learning within higher education

22

1.1%

15

1.60%

3

5.000

2

institution: a bibliometric


## analysis of the literature (2008-


2018).

Social teaching: student

perspectives on the inclusion of

16

0.8%

17

1.55%

4

4.250

4

social media in higher

education.

Networked scholarship and

motivations for social media use

13

0.65%

5

4.250

17

1.52%

3

in scholarly communication.



Social media as a tool for

extending academic teaching &

0.2%

6

0.75

0.44%

7

4

3

learning or influence of social

media in students’ academic

performance.

The time evolution of the publications and citations in the social media

involvement in learning and studying: the development of using social media in the

study and learning has led authors to write about the influence of social media on the

students. Another reason for the huge increase in the development of articles in this field

is the large number of people who have a mobile phone, which led to an increase in the

number of accounts in social media for discussion among students.

Figure 3 shows the evolution of the average article citations per year, in the social

media involved in the learning and studying field. For more, in 2017 the average

citations are 2.889 per year. In 2018 the average number of citations is 4.35786 per year.

The average citation in 2019 was 4.35786 per year. But no records of citations in 2020.

Fig. 3 Annual average article citations in the social media involving in learning and studying

It is evident that older papers are expected to have received more citations than the

more recent ones which have not been read by many readers yet. That can explain why

the articles in 2020 have no citations yet.

This study has performed a measure of journals in four ways i.e., ranking based on

total citations, based on total global and local citations ranked, and ranking based on the

h-index. The study provided with the following information about the six metrics that

the top-10 journals in social media involved in the learning and studying field that are

used in this research. For that, none of the journals manages to achieve its ranking for

all 6 metrics.  Only one journal has managed to retain the same ranking in five out of

six metrics. Which is the “International Review of Research in Open and Distance

Learning”.



Fig. 4 Cumulative occurrence of social media involvement in publications

The cumulative growth in the annual publication of social media involvement in

learning and studying papers in the top four journals concerning their h-index is shown

in figure 4. From figure 4, the “Computers and Education” journal was from 2017 to

2018 it was suspended and after 2018 it increased to 2019 in research production. The

journal “International Journal of Management Education” has oscillating between high

and low, which is 2018, and 2020 has the most time for production in this field.

While “Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing” have increased significantly

from 2019 to 2020. The journal “International Review of Research Open and Distance

Learning” has a lot of articles published in 2017, but after 2017 the publication has

stopped in this field.

Most prolific author: Paper writing productivity of each social media involvement

in learning and studying authors is measured in four ways: the first measure is the

number of publications in which one’s name appears as an author. However, since one

author’s contribution is reduced when more authors are added to the paper, we also

apply a second measure which counts the number of fractional publications. This

number adjusts productivity with the number of authors in one paper. The third measure

is the total citations of one author in the social media involvement in the learning and

studying field and the fourth measure is one’s h-index on this specific field. Since author

productivity ranking is described with four metrics, it is important that for an author to

establish a definite ranking, one must have the same ranking in all four metrics, or a

higher one in one of the metrics. For example, if an author gains the second position in

three out of the four metrics, but in the fourth metric he has gained a higher position

than in the 2nd, namely he has gained the 1st position, then we can speak definitely about

a 2nd position. Overall, we observe two authors that have a strong ranking position in

three out of the four metrics. These authors are “Cooke S.” and “Abdullah Z.”.



Table 2 Ranking of authors in different metrics

Author

h-index

g-index

m-index

TC

NP

PY_Start

ABDULLAH Z

1

1

0.250

3

1

2017

ADENIYI EA

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

AGLLIAS K

0

0

0.00

0

1

2020

AITCHISON C

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

AJAMU GJ

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

AL-RAHMI WM

0

0

0.000

0

0

-

ALBERTH A

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

ALSHAYA H

1

1

0.333

1

1

2018

ALSHEHRI O

0

0

0.000

0

1

2019

ALT D

1

1

0.333

18

1

2018

ARIS B

1

1

0.250

3

1

2017

ATALLA S

1

1

0.333

1

1

2018

AWOTUNDE JB

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

AYO FE

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

BAARAN S

0

0

0.000

0

1

2019

BALOUL MS

0

0

0.000

0

1

2019

BAPITHA L

0

0

0.000

0

1

2020

BERGDAHL N

1

0

0.000

0

1

2020

BLAKEMORE T

1

0

0.000

0

1

2020

BOLD U

1

0

0.000

0

1

2019

Table 2 provides the ranking of additional social media involvement in learning and

studying authors and their ranking is based on additional metrics. It ranks 20 authors in

six metrics. The h-index and the g-index offer the same ranking to all authors and this

is expected and explained by the nature and the definition of the two indexes. The m-

index, however, provides a completely different ranking. Only “Abdullah Z.” keeps the

same first position in the h-index, g-index, and NP (Number of papers). The different

ranking also continues with total citations. Table 2, can have different ranks for authors

with these different metrics.

The paper presents ten origin countries from where publications in social media

involvement in learning and studying have stemmed the most. The origin of the

publication does not signify the country origin of the author, but the country the author’s

affiliation. Thus, the figure identifies ten major origin countries from where publications

in the social media involvement in learning and studying have stemmed. Once again it

is verified something we have already mentioned, i.e., that “American Countries” are

on the rise in social media and therefore they are keener to investigate the topic. Two

Asian countries appear as well in this figure. These are “Malaysia”, and “Indonesia”.



The highest number of studies originates from affiliations in “USA”, then “Malaysia”

by publishing 3 articles from 50 articles. “Indonesia” and “Sweden” have published two

articles in each country in this study. Other remaining countries have published one

article in this study.

Moreover, the “social media” keyword specifically is expected to follow the same

growth trend as the number of publications themselves. According to Figure 5, there is

a clear upward tendency in the keyword “social media” which is due to the usage of this

keyword in almost all papers. The rest of the lines reveal a less steep evolution of the

keywords. This occurs in “students”, “social networking online”, “human experiment”,

“teaching”. The rest of the keywords such as “education”, “WhatsApp, “high

education”, occur at a constant level at all times up to date.

Fig. 5 Evolution of different keywords




## Conclusion


Social media has had a significant impact on individual lives, including our way of

teaching and learning. The motivation to conduct this study arose from the fact that to

identify the potential impact of social media on learning and teaching and which social

media application is most commonly used for teaching and learning from the student’s

perspective. The researchers addressed a comprehensive selection of studies published

in Scopus-indexed journals between 2017 and 2020, inclusive. The systematic review

uncovered 50 articles relevant to learning and teaching via social media, which were

analyzed in terms of “most influential paper,” “key authors,” and “keywords.    and

revealed research trends over the last four years by citation analysis. This will be

beneficial for researchers and practitioners who require a reliable knowledge base from

which to launch further research into learning and teaching via social media. Future

work can be carried out to conduct content analysis to evaluate and identify trends and

themes in data sets and identify self-citations of authors that may some impact on

research quality.




## Reference


[1] Obar, J.A. and S.S. Wildman, “Social media definition and the governance challenge-an


## introduction to the special issue”, Obar, Social media definition and the governance challenge: An



## introduction to the special issue. Telecommunications policy, Vol. 39, pp. 745-750, 2015.


[2] Leung, X.Y.a.S., Jie and Bai, Billy, “Bibliometrics of social media research: A co-citation and co-

word analysis”, International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 66, pp. 35-45, 2017.

[3] Cavus, NaM., Ayaz Khalid, “Investigating faculty members’ awareness on social media usage in

teaching and learning”, New Trends and Issues Proceedings on Humanities and Social Sciences,

Vol. 3, pp. 221-226, 2017.

[4] Genero, MaFan.-S., Ana M and Nelson, H James and Poels, Geert and Piattini, Mario, “Research

review: a systematic literature review on the quality of UML models”, Journal of Database

Management (JDM), Vol. 22, pp. 46-70, 2011.

[5] Moghavvemi, SaS., Ainin and Jaafar, Noor Ismawati and Kasem, Nafisa, “Social media as a

complementary learning tool for teaching and learning: The case of youtube”, The International

Journal of Management Education, Vol. 16, pp. 37-42, 2018.

[6] Wakefield, J.a.F., Jessica K, “How does students' general academic achievement moderate the

implications of social networking on specific levels of learning performance?”, Computers &

Education, Vol. 144, 2020.

[7] Lau, W.W., “Effects of social media usage and social media multitasking on the academic

performance of university students”, Computers in human behavior, Vol. 68, pp. 286-291, 2017.

[8] Siddiqui, S. and T. Singh, “Social media its impact with positive and negative aspects”,

International Journal of Computer Applications Technology and Research, Vol. 5, pp. 71-75,

2016.

[9] Manca, S. and M. Ranieri, “Networked scholarship and motivations for social media use in

scholarly communication”, International review of research in open and distributed learning, Vol.

18, pp. 123-138, 2017.

[10] Zhang, W., et al. “A privacy-preserving voting protocol on blockchain”, IEEE 11th International

Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2018.

[11] Singh, G., C. Kesselman, and E. Deelman. “A provisioning model and its comparison with best-

effort for performance-cost optimization in grids”, ACM, 2007.

[12] Prestridge, S., “Categorising teachers’ use of social media for their professional learning: A self-

generating professional learning paradigm”, Computers & Education, Vol. 129, pp. 143-158,

2019.

[13] Wu, J.-Y. and T. Cheng, “Who is better adapted in learning online within the personal learning

environment? Relating gender differences in cognitive attention networks to digital distraction”,

Computers & Education, Vol. 128, pp. 312-329, 2019.

[14] Law, K.M., S. Geng, and T. Li, “Student enrollment, motivation and learning performance in a

blended learning environment: The mediating effects of social, teaching, and cognitive presence”,

Computers & Education, Vol. 136, pp. 1-12, 2019.



[15] Rueda, L., J. Benitez, and J. Braojos, “From traditional education technologies to student

satisfaction in Management education: A theory of the role of social media applications”,

Information & Management, Vol. 54, pp. 1059-1071, 2017.

[16] Sobaih, A.E.E., et al., “To use or not to use? Social media in higher education in developing

countries”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 58, pp. 296-305, 2016.

[17] Manca, S. and M. Ranieri, “Yes for sharing, no for teaching!: Social Media in academic practices”,

The Internet and Higher Education, Vol. 29, pp. 63-74, 2016.

[18] Aria, M. and C. Cuccurullo, “Bibliometrix: An R-tool for comprehensive science mapping


## analysis”, Journal of Informetrics, Vol. 11, pp. 959-975, 2017.


[19] Ahmad, N., A.N. Menegaki, and S. Al‐Muharrami, “Systematic literature review of tourism

growth nexus: an overview of the literature and a content analysis of 100 most influential papers”,

Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 34, pp. 1068-1110, 2020.

[20] Shaikh, A. K., Alhashmi, S. M., & Parthiban, R., “A semantic-based centralized resource

discovery model for grid computing”, In International Conference on Grid and Distributed

Computing, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.

Biography

Abdul Khalique Shaikh is an Assistant Professor associated with the Department of

Information Systems at Sultan Qaboos University Muscat Oman. He has received his PhD

degree from a highly reputable Australian University Monash in 2013 and Master degree

from University of Detroit USA with distinction. His research interest includes Social

Network Analytics, Big Data Analytics, Data Science, Data Governance, E-participation and

Blockchain Technology.

Saqib Ali is a business, IT implementation and execution professional, with strong skills in

business analysis, Software development, management, and implementation, developed

through higher education and useful work experience. Strong understanding of developing

business strategies, business process integration and their alignment with IT, along with

innovative practices to gain or sustain a competitive advantage. Dr. Saqib has also been active

in teaching and R&D (Research and Development), he successfully able to attract number of internal, external

and strategic grants while working at SQU.

Ramla Al-Maamari  is a final year undergraduate student in the Department of Information

Systems, College of Economics & Political Science at Sultan Qaboos University. Her

research interests include E-learning, E-commerce, Social Media and  Technology Adoption

Model.