KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and

Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

Daniel Rosendo

daniel.rosendo@inria.fr

Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, , IRISA

Rennes, France

Kate Keahey

keahey@mcs.anl.gov

Argonne National Laboratory

Chicago, USA

Alexandru Costan

alexandru.costan@inria.fr

Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Rennes, France

Matthieu Simonin

matthieu.simonin@inria.fr

Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Rennes, France

Patrick Valduriez

patrick.valduriez@inria.fr

Univ Montpellier, Inria, CNRS,

LIRMM

Montpellier, France

Gabriel Antoniu

gabriel.antoniu@inria.fr

Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Rennes, France

arXiv:2307.12796v1  [cs.DC]  24 Jul 2023

KEYWORDS


## ABSTRACT


Distributed infrastructures for computation and analytics are now

evolving towards an interconnected ecosystem allowing complex

scientific workflows to be executed across hybrid systems spanning

from IoT Edge devices to Clouds, and sometimes to supercomput-

ers (the Computing Continuum). Understanding the performance

trade-offs of large-scale workflows deployed on such complex Edge-

to-Cloud Continuum is challenging. To achieve this, one needs to

systematically perform experiments, to enable their reproducibility

and allow other researchers to replicate the study and the obtained


## conclusions on different infrastructures. This breaks down to the


tedious process of reconciling the numerous experimental require-

ments and constraints with low-level infrastructure design choices.

To address the limitations of the main state-of-the-art approaches

for distributed, collaborative experimentation, such as Google Co-

lab, Kaggle, and Code Ocean, we propose KheOps, a collaborative

environment specifically designed to enable cost-effective repro-

ducibility and replicability of Edge-to-Cloud experiments. KheOps

is composed of three core elements: (1) an experiment repository;

(2) a notebook environment; and (3) a multi-platform experiment


## methodology.


We illustrate KheOps with a real-life Edge-to-Cloud application.

The evaluations explore the point of view of the authors of an exper-

iment described in an article (who aim to make their experiments

reproducible) and the perspective of their readers (who aim to repli-

cate the experiment). The results show how KheOps helps authors

to systematically perform repeatable and reproducible experiments

on the Grid5000 + FIT IoT LAB testbeds. Furthermore, KheOps

helps readers to cost-effectively replicate authors experiments in

different infrastructures such as Chameleon Cloud + CHI@Edge

testbeds, and obtain the same conclusions with high accuracies

(>88% for all performance metrics).

Reproducibility, Replicability, Repeatability, Computing Continuum,

Workflows, Edge Computing, Cloud Computing

1


## INTRODUCTION


Modern scientific workflows require hybrid infrastructures, com-

bining resources and services executed on the IoT/Edge with other

resources and services running on Clouds or on HPC systems (the

Computing Continuum [39]) to enable their optimized execution.

Due to the complexity of application deployments on such highly

distributed and heterogeneous Edge-to-Cloud infrastructures, re-

alizing the Computing Continuum vision in practice remains bur-

densome.

One challenge stems from systematically performing experi-

ments on the continuum. In particular, the processes enabling their

reproducibility, as well as the replication of the performance trade-

offs are inherently difficult [41]. Figure 1 illustrates such processes.

Let us consider the case of a group of researchers who execute their

experiments on French scientific testbeds such as Grid’5000 [35]

(providing Cloud/HPC servers) and FIT IoT LAB [32] (providing

IoT/Edge devices), and want to publish their results in an article.

Next, the readers want to replicate the experiments on American

testbeds such as the Chameleon Cloud [44] and CHI@Edge [43].

These processes compel a lot of effort, are time-consuming, and

bring many technical challenges for both sides. For instance, also

depicted in Figure 1, they require: (1) following methodologies to

systematically design the experiments and to reconcile many appli-

cation requirements or constraints in terms of energy consumption,

network efficiency, and hardware resource usage; (2) configuring

systems and networks, and deploying applications on testbeds for

large-scale evaluations; (3) analyzing, repeating experiments, and

publishing results; and (4) finally, providing open access to the

experiment artifacts in a public and safe repository.

Given such complexities, researchers end up not following rigor-

ous methodologies for supporting the reproducibility of the experi-

ments, as observed in our previous survey [52] and summarized in

Figure 2. As a consequence, it makes it hard for other researchers

to replicate the published studies [46].

CCS CONCEPTS

• Computing methodologies →Distributed computing method-

ologies; • General and reference →Experimentation; Mea-

surement;



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

Published

(1) Author

Article

Bob

(2) Reader

CHI@Edge

Replicate

Experiments


## Results


Alice

Figure 2: Support to the reproducibility of Edge-to-Cloud

experiments provided by the 34 studies in our survey [52].

Deployment

2

r-REQ 4. Efficiently configure the experimental infrastructure to re-

duce the time spent satisfying all the experiment require-

ments.

In this paper, we study the challenges of reproducing and repli-

cating Edge-to-Cloud experiments in cost-effective ways. Cost-

effective means to allow authors and readers to easily fulfill their

experimental requirements as previously described. This calls for

practical solutions beyond the state-of-the-art.

Our main objective is to provide a collaborative environment

and methodology that supports reproducible Edge-to-Coud experi-

mentation between different open testbeds such as Grid’5000, FIT

IoT LAB, Chameleon, etc., equipped to deal with IoT/Edge and

Cloud/HPC resources which are fundamental to reproducibility [42].

We propose the following main contributions:


## Analysis &


Publication

Experiment

3

1

Design

Open Access to Artifacts

4

Figure 1: Processes for reproducing and replicating experi-

ments regarding the authors and readers point of view.

(1) A study of the characteristics of the main state-of-the-

art collaborative environments (e.g., Google Colab, Kag-

gle, and Code Ocean) for enabling reproducible experiments.

Their main limitations in the context of Computing

Continuum research are discussed in Section 3.

(2) A novel collaborative environment to enable repro-

ducible Edge-to-Cloud experiments (Section 4). This ap-

proach, named KheOps, allows researchers to reproduce and

replicate Edge-to-Cloud workflows cost-effectively. KheOps

core elements are: (1) a portal for sharing experiment arti-

facts; (2) a notebook environment for packaging code, data,

environment, and results; and (3) a multi-platform ex-

perimental methodology for deploying experiments on het-

erogeneous resources from the IoT/Edge (FIT IoT LAB and

CHI@Edge) to the Cloud/HPC Continuum (Grid5000 and

Chameleon). We highlight that KheOps may be integrated

with other large-scale scientific testbeds.

(3) An experimental validation of the proposed approach

with a real-world use case deployed on real-life IoT/Edge

devices and Cloud/HPC systems. The evaluations show

that KheOps helps: (1) authors to perform reproducible ex-

periments on the Grid5000 + FIT IoT LAB testbeds, and (2)

readers to cost-effectively replicate authors experiments on

the Chameleon Cloud + CHI@Edge testbeds, and obtain

the same conclusions with high accuracies, >88% for all

performance metrics (Section 5).

Let us sum up the associated requirements in this context [40, 55].

To enable reproducible experiments on the Edge-to-Cloud contin-

uum, the requirements (a-REQ) of the authors of the experiments

can be described as follows:

a-REQ 1. Execute experiments on heterogeneous computing resources

(e.g., IoT/Edge and Cloud/HPC infrastructures).

a-REQ 2. Systematically describe and explain the experimental pro-

cesses and their reasoning.

a-REQ 3. Efficiently configure the experimental infrastructure and

express topologies in repeatable ways.

a-REQ 4. Easily share the experiment artifacts in a public and safe

repository.

At the same time, to enable the replicability of the experiments,

the readers of an article describing those experiments have the

following requirements (r-REQ):

r-REQ 1. Find and access the experiment as simply as finding and

reading its paper.

r-REQ 2. Perform the experiment, not just read about it.

r-REQ 3. Answer not just to the “What” question (What the experi-

ment does?), but also the “Why” (Why did authors set up that

way?) and “How” (How did authors connect machines/de-

vices?)



KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Table 1: ACM Digital Library Terminology Version 1.1 [1]

configuration between Edge devices and the Cloud server) on the

performance metrics.

Reproducibility means that external researchers having access

to the original methodology (e.g., configuration of physical ma-

chines, network and systems, scenario descriptions) and using their

own artifacts (i.e., data sets, scripts, AI frameworks, etc.) can obtain

precise measurements of the application processing latency and

throughput, for instance.

Replicability refers to independent researchers (i.e., the read-

ers of an article that was published by a different team) having

access to the original methodology and artifacts (e.g., configuration

of physical machines, processing steps, network setup, etc.) and

performing the experiments in different testbeds. The goal is that

independent researchers can obtain precise results and conclusions

consistent with the original study.

Same team, same experimental setup: the measurement can

be obtained with stated precision by the same team using the

same measurement procedure, the same measuring system,

under the same operating conditions, in the same location on

multiple trials. For computational experiments, this means

that a researcher can reliably repeat their own computation.

Repeatability

Different team, same experimental setup: the measurement

can be obtained with stated precision by a different team using

the same measurement procedure, the same measuring system,

under the same operating conditions, in the same or a different

location on multiple trials. For computational experiments, this

means that an independent group can obtain the same result

using the author’s own artifacts.

Reproducibility

2.2

Trovi sharing portal

Different team, different experimental setup: the measurement

can be obtained with stated precision by a different team, a

different measuring system, in a different location on multiple

trials. For computational experiments, this means that an

independent group can obtain the same result using artifacts

which they develop completely independently.

Replicability

Collaborative systems should be integrated with public and safe

repositories providing open access to the research artifacts to enable

the reproducibility of experiments. Repositories like Trovi [28],

Kaggle [21], Code Ocean Explorer [9], AI Hub [7], GitHub [4], and

Zenodo [5] allow users to store versioned and citeable (e.g., through

a DOI: Digital Object Identifier) artifacts such as code, datasets, or

Jupyter notebooks, among others.

In this work, we leverage on the Trovi sharing portal because it

provides a public REST API that facilitates integration with existing

systems. Furthermore, Trovi provides a series of features to manage

research artifacts such as: integration with GitHub and Zenodo;

creating, packaging, and sharing artifacts as Jupyter notebooks with

500MB in total size by default; support for scientific testbeds like

Chameleon, which allows users to re-launch the available artifacts

on the testbed.

2


## BACKGROUND


In this section, we start by defining the terms repeatability, re-

producibility, and replicability (Section 2.1). Next, we explore the

following research question from the Computing Continuum per-

spective: What would a good collaborative system look like?

In our vision, it should: (1) allow users to share research artifacts

in a public and safe repository (Section 2.2); (2) provide an envi-

ronment for setting up and describing experiments step-by-step

(Section 2.3); (3) provide experimental methodologies to leverage

heterogeneous Edge-to-Cloud computing resources from various

scientific testbeds, at large-scale (Section 2.4).

2.3

Jupyter environment

Another important aspect for reproducible and replicable exper-

iments is that collaborative systems support executable research

packages composed of code, data, environment configurations, and

experiment results. The most popular open-source solutions are

Jupyter notebooks [45] and Apache Zeppelin [8]. In this work, we

use Jupyter notebooks for packaging research artifacts due to its

wider compatibility with operating systems and programming lan-

guages, and the community support.

The Jupyter project consists of JupyterHub, JupyterLab, and note-

books. JupyterHub aims to serve Cloud-based Jupyter notebooks for

multiple users. The goal is to provide users a ready-to-use computa-

tional environment with their own workspace on shared resources.

JupyterHub servers are customizable, scalable, and portable on a

variety of infrastructures. It is composed of a Hub that manages the

following sub-services: a proxy that receives requests from clients;

spawners to monitor notebook servers; and an authenticator to

manage how users access the system.

JupyterLab refers to a web-based user interface providing mainly:

notebook, terminal, text editor, file browser, and rich outputs. It

allows users to configure and arrange their experimental workflows,

as well as adding extensions to expand and enrich functionalities.

2.1

Repeatability, Reproducibility, Replicability

An important requirement for researchers from various communi-

ties is that the scientific claims be verifiable by others (i.e., building

upon published results). As illustrated in Figure 2, such requirement

is hardly satisfied in the context of Computing Continuum experi-

ments. This can be achieved through repeatability, reproducibility,

and replicability (3Rs) [34, 56]. There are many non-uniform defini-

tions of the 3Rs in literature. In this work, we follow the terminol-

ogy proposed by the ACM Digital Library [1] (Artifact Review and

Badging version 1.1), as presented in Table 1.

Achieving repeatability means that one can reliably repeat

the experiments and obtain precise measurements (e.g., Edge to

Cloud processing latency, memory consumption, among others)

by using the same methodology and artifacts (i.e., same testbed,

same physical machines, same libraries/framework, same network

configuration). Executing multiple experiments allows us to explore

different scenario settings (e.g., varying the number of Edge devices)

and explore the impact of various parameters (e.g., the network



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

Google Colab [18]. Mainly used by the AI community (more

than 50K users), it is a ready-to-use Jupyter notebook service. Co-

lab notebooks are stored in the .ipynb open-source Jupyter note-

book format [19], and come with the most popular AI libraries

and frameworks installed (e.g., Scikit-Learn [50], TensorFlow [31],

PyTorch [49], etc.) and allow users to run python code through the

browser. It is typically used for machine learning, data analysis and

education. Colab is popular because it allows users to share Jupyter

notebooks without having to download, install, or run anything.

Besdides, it provides free access to very expensive computing re-

sources such as GPUs and TPUs. Colab permits multiple users to

collaborate on the same notebook. Sharing datasets, ML models,

pipelines, and notebooks on AI Hub [7] is also possible (more than

167 notebooks). Its GitHub integration allows users to quickly open

GitHub-hosted Jupyter notebooks in Google Colab.

Provide

access to

Optimal

Configuration

Visualization

Metrics &

Monitoring

Public

repository


## results


Services

Services

Services

Define

workflow

Services

Services

Services

Define Experimental Environment

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Define

network

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Define

layers &

services

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer N

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Services

Kaggle [21]. This is a data science and AI platform that offers a

customizable Jupyter notebook environment. Kaggle is a subsidiary

of Google and, like Colab, it provides free access to GPUs as well

as a repository of community-published (more than 10.3 million

users) datasets (more than 50K public datasets) and code (e.g., ma-

chine learning code) with more than 400K public notebooks. Kaggle

is integrated with AI Hub and is popular in the data science and

machine learning communities. Kaggle is also well-known for pro-

moting Community Competitions in machine learning at no cost.

The main differences [20] between Colab and Kaggle are: (1) Kaggle

allows collaboration with other users on its Web site, while Colab

allows collaboration with anyone using the notebook link; (2) Kag-

gle has a lot of data sets that users can use directly (e.g., notebooks

already set up with Kaggle databases [22]), while in Colab setting

up notebooks with Google Drive [11] or managing files [10] (e.g., to

load data sets, files, and images) requires extra work; and (3) Kaggle

creates a history of notebook commits that we can be reviewed.

Provide

access to

artifacts

experiment

configs.

Software,

algorithms


## Dataset


Public

repository

Figure 3: E2Clab experiment methodology [53].

Finally, notebooks allow users to create programming documents

combining: (1) formatted text (e.g., prospective data that explains

each step of an experiment workflow); (2) executable code with the

respective outputs (e.g., retrospective data derived by the execution);

and (3) experimental results with visualizations and various sorts

of rich media, such as images and videos.

2.4

E2Clab experimental methodology

Understanding and optimizing workflow performance requires exe-

cuting and reproducing complex experiments at large scale. Several

existing environments aid users to run such experiments. Their lim-

itations are discussed in the next section and summarized in Table 2.

Based on these findings and the specific Computing Continuum

requirements, in this work we leverage the E2Clab methodology.

E2Clab [53] is an open-source framework (available at [6]) that

implements a rigorous methodology (illustrated in Figure 3) for

designing experiments with real-world workloads on the Edge-to-

Cloud Continuum. It allows researchers to reproduce the applica-

tion behavior in a controlled environment in order to understand

and optimize performance [51]. E2Clab sits on top of EnOSlib [36]

to enforce the experiment configurations on testbeds. High-level

features provided by E2Clab are: (i) reproducible experiments; (ii)

mapping application parts (Edge, Fog and Cloud/HPC) and physi-

cal testbeds; (iii) experiment variation and transparent scaling of

scenarios; (iv) defining Edge-to-Cloud network constraints; (v) ex-

periment deployment, execution and monitoring (e.g., on Grid’5000,

Chameleon, and FIT IoT LAB); and (vi) workflow optimization.

Code Ocean [37]. Designed according to FAIR [57] (i.e., Find-

able, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable), Code Ocean aims

to make scientific work reproducible. It introduces the concept of

Compute Capsule, which refers to Docker [14] containers com-

posed of code, data, environments, and results. Capsules provide

ready-to-use tools such as Git, Jupyter, RStudio, among others. Its

integration with Git allows users to save changes on capsules and

then commit them with just one click. Furthermore, users can easily

share the link of a capsule and grant permissions. Code Ocean pro-

vides scalable compute and storage resources hosted on Amazon

Web Services. Resources used by capsules are scaled out when the

demand exceeds the machine capacity. Finally, Code Ocean pro-

vides a public Capsule Repository [9] with more than 1K research

capsules. It allows authors of an article to incorporate capsules into

the submission process via a Hub publishing API.

Despite these systems being widely used by the AI and


## data science communities, they present some limitations that


hinder their adoption for Computing Continuum research.

Table 2 summarizes these limitations in terms of:

3

LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING

COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENTS

(1) access to heterogeneous computing resources, from the

IoT/Edge to the Cloud/HPC;

(2) support for large-scale experimental evaluations;

We briefly discuss the limitations of state-of-the-art collaborative

environments, with a focus on the specific challenges of the Com-

puting Continuum.



KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Table 2: Limitations of Existing Collaborative Environments.

Limitation

Google Colab

Code Ocean

Kaggle

experiments run on AWS virtual ma-

chines; no access to IoT/Edge devices;

limits CPU, GPU, and TPU access; does

not support IoT/Edge devices;

CPU, disk, and memory limits; GPU types

available; no access to IoT/Edge devices;

Resource

heterogeneity

limits sessions to 12 hours; paid access to

multiple computing resources.

limits access to 10 compute hours; paid

access to multiple computing resources.

limits execution time to 12 hours; paid

access to Google Cloud Services.

Large-scale

experiments

hard to repeat and reproduce experi-

ments on the same hardware: resource

availability varies over time and usage

limits fluctuate. Replicability in different

infrastructures (e.g., beyond Google ma-

chines) is not straightforward.

lacks support for the reproducibility of

distributed experiments. Computing and

storage resources are available in AWS

virtual machines in the clients virtual pri-

vate cloud. Hard to replicate experiments

in different infrastructures.

lacks support for the repeatability and re-

producibility of distributed experiments.

Computing resources vary over time and

hence between accesses. Replicability in

different infrastructures is not easy to set

up.

Repeatability,

Reproducibility,

Replicability

1 environment:

2

g5k: cluster: dahu

3

iotlab: cluster: grenoble

4 layers:

5 - name: cloud

6

services:

7

- name: Server

8

environment: g5k , quantity: 1

9 - name: edge

10

services:

11

- name: Client

12

environment: iotlab , archi: rpi3 , quantity: 5

Listing 1: E2Clab: layers and services configuration.

Hardware details described in Section 5.1.

1 from e2clab.services import Service

2 import enoslib as en

3

4 class Server(Service):

5

def deploy(self):

6

with en.actions(roles=self.roles) as a:

7

a.shell("pip3 install torchvision torch")

8

a.shell("pip3 install pillow paho -mqtt")

9

return self.register_service(port =[1883])

Listing 2: E2Clab: user-defined service for the Cloud server.

publicly available to allow others to recreate and rerun experiments.

Trovi provides a REST API to manage experiment artifacts and

integrate them with other systems. The JupyterHub in KheOps uses

the Trovi REST API to download artifacts and launch them in the

JupyterLab server.

Artifacts hosted in Trovi can also provide references to reposi-

tories like container registries (e.g., DockerHub [2]), multipurpose

repositories (e.g., Zenodo [5]), code repositories (e.g., Github [4]),

and among others.

(3) repeatability and reproducibility of experiments on the

same hardware setup, and replicability on different in-

frastructures.

In summary, collaborative environments lack support for

providing access to heterogeneous resources (e.g., Edge-to-

Cloud); performing experiments at large-scale; and achieving

the repeatability, reproducibility, and the replicability of ex-

periments in different testbeds. Hence, the need for novel ap-

proaches for reproducible evaluations of workflows targeting

the characteristics of the Computing Continuum.

4.1.2

Notebook environment. Following our previous work [33]

on integrating experiment workflows with Jupyter notebooks, we

extend JupyterHub to authenticate users and to download (using the

Trovi REST API) the experiment artifacts available at Trovi. We also

extend JupyterLab to allow users to easily share their experiments in

Trovi. Furthermore, JupyterLab is set up with the E2Clab framework

as an experimental methodology.

The JupyterLab is packaged with code, data, environment con-

figurations, and experiment results. Its notebooks (file extension

.ipynb) allow users to run experiments step-by-step by combining

text (e.g., explaining the reasoning of the experiments: What pa-

rameters? Why these parameters? and How it was set up?) with

executable code. Such notebooks are ready to use (e.g., installed

with required library/software), executed through a browser, and

shared as a Trovi artifact.

4

KHEOPS DESIGN

This section introduces KheOps, a collaborative environment for

the cost-effective reproducibility and replicability of Edge-to-Cloud

experiments. KheOps is designed to meet the experimental require-

ments of both authors and readers as presented in Section 1.

4.1

Architecture and implementation

Figure 4 presents the architecture of KheOps, which consists of

three main components: (i) Trovi sharing portal; (ii) Jupyter en-

vironment (JupyterHub service and JupyterLab server); and (iii)

E2Clab framework (multi-platform experiment methodology). Next,

present the integration details of KheOps three components, and

we briefly describe their main roles.

4.1.3

Multi-testbed experiment methodology. KheOps uses the E2Clab


## methodology to deploy experiments on large-scale scientific testbeds


such as Grid’5000, Chameleon Cloud, CHI@Edge, and FIT IoT LAB.

Notebooks come with three main template files (e.g., executable

code cells in the notebook, presented in Listings 1 to 4) that users

can benefit from to easily configure and adapt the deployment logic

4.1.1

Experiment repository. KheOps uses Trovi to share research

artifacts such as packaged experiments. These artifacts may be



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

Large-scale Scientific Testbeds

Chameleon + Gridʼ5000 + FIT IoT LAB

credentials

KheOps

Trovi

(4)

Downloads

Storage Backends

Zenodo

GitHub

Swift

artifacts

from Trovi

JupyterLab

Trovi API

E2Clab


## methodology


(5) Deploys

experiments

(1) Requests list of

experiment artifacts

(3) Spawns

Web Interface

(displays packaged artifacts)

on testbeds

notebook

server

Experiment results

JupyterHub

(2) Users

Spawner

(extended with

Trovi integration)

request

launch of

Trovi artifact

Figure 4: KheOps architecture and experimental workflow.

1 networks:

2 - src: cloud , dst: edge

3

delay: "150ms", rate: "25kbit", loss: "0.02"

1 - hosts: edge.*

2

depends_on:

3

conf_selector: cloud.server .*

4

grouping: round_robin , prefix: "server"

5

prepare:

6

- copy:

7

src :{{ working_dir }}/ artifacts , dest: /

8

launch:

9

- shell: bash /edge_worker.sh edge_data 100 "{{

Listing 3: E2Clab: network configuration.

(e.g., computing resources, network, and application execution)

according to their experimental needs.

The first file, named layers_services.yaml and presented in List-

ing 1, allows users to lease IoT/Edge and Cloud/HPC resources.

Through this file, users may also set up their applications and ser-

vices as presented in Listing 2. Next, the network.yaml file (Listing 3)

allows users to define delay, loss, and bandwidth between comput-

ing resources. Finally, the workflow.yaml file (Listing 4) guides

users to define the experiment workflow through three main steps:

prepare (e.g., copy artifacts to remote nodes, install libraries, etc.),

launch (e.g., execute the application parts), and finalize (e.g., backup


## results from remote nodes to the JupyterLab server).


E2Clab abstracts all the complexities of deploying and executing

experiments across various testbeds. To do so, users need to add

the credential files of the respective testbeds to their notebooks.

Setting up a VPN is also supported as this may be required to enable

the communication between different geographically distributed

tesbeds (e.g., Chameleon in the USA and Grid’5000 in France).

server.ip}}" False

10

finalize:

11

- fetch:

12

src:/tmp/predict.log , dest :{{ working_dir }}/

Listing 4: E2Clab: workflow configuration.

and then it downloads experimental artifacts such as notebooks,

code, and datasets, among others (step 4). The JupyterLab service

is set up with the E2Clab framework as the experimental method-

ology. Finally, users can execute the code cells from the notebook

to lease IoT/Edge and Cloud/HPC computing resources available

on the testbeds, deploy and execute the application, and gather the

experiment results (step 5).

Steps 2 to 4 are automatically executed. This is a one-click feature

that allows users to have a ready-to-use environment for repro-

ducing and replicating complex Edge-to-Cloud experiments in a

cost-effective manner. Note that the whole workflow requires only

three clicks: selecting the experiment artifact (step 1); then launch-

ing it (steps 2 to 4); and executing it on the testbeds (step 5).

4.2

Experimental workflow

In summary, the workflow for launching an experiment artifact

on large-scale testbeds consists of 5 main steps. First, through a

web interface, users can browse the list of experimental artifacts

publicly available in Trovi (step 1). Selecting an artifact displays

details such as the experiment description, the authors and contact

information, and the artifact versions.

A launch button allows users to execute the artifact (step 2). This

button redirects users to the JupyterHub service. After authenti-

cation, the request to launch the artifact is sent to the JupyterHub

Spawner. Next, the Spawner spawns the JupyterLab server (step 3)

5

EVALUATION

In this section, we show how KheOps can be used to analyze the

performance of a real-life Edge-to-Cloud application deployed in

the African savanna (illustrated in Figure 5). This application is

composed of distributed Edge devices monitoring animal migration

in the Serengeti region. Devices at the Edge collect and compress

wildlife images, then the image is sent to the Cloud where the

animal classification happens using a pre-trained Neural Network



KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Cloud

𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦= 1 −



𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥1𝐴,𝑥2𝐴)

𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥1𝐴,𝑥2𝐴) −𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑥1𝑅,𝑥2𝑅)

(1)

𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑥1𝑅,𝑥2𝑅)

Ideally, 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦would be close to 1. 𝑥𝑖𝐴and 𝑥𝑖𝑅refer to the

application performance metric value obtained from authors and

readers experiments, respectively. For instance, in Figure 6a, 𝑥1𝐴

refers to the Cloud-centric bar and 𝑥2𝐴to the Edge+Cloud bar.

Edge

Workload. Devices at the Edge transmit images (from the Snap-

shot Serengeti dataset [30] composed of millions of wildlife images

collected annually) to the Cloud server that predicts animals using

a trained MobileNetV3 Convolutional Neural Network model. We

evaluate this workload considering two network configurations,

25Kbit and 15Kbit bandwidth with a round-trip delay of 150ms.

Software. On the Edge devices, we use the zlib [24] Python

library to compress images. MQTT [23] protocol is used to transmit

images to the Cloud server. On the Cloud server, we use an MQTT

broker to receive images, then zlib to decompress images, and finally

PyTorch to predict animals.

Figure 5: Edge-to-Cloud application: monitoring animals mi-

gration in the African savanna.

model. Finally, classified data helps conservationists to learn what

management strategies work best to protect species.

The goals of these experiments are:

Hardware. The authors perform experiments on the follow-

ing testbeds in France: Grid’5000 and FIT IoT LAB. On Grid’5000

(Cloud server), they use the dahu [13] machine equipped with an

Intel Xeon Gold 6130 CPU 2.10GHz, 16 cores/CPU, 192GB of RAM,

and Ethernet network. On FIT IoT LAB (Edge device), they use a

Raspberry Pi 3 Model B [25] with four ARM Cortex-A53 process-

ing cores running at 1.2GHz, 1GB LPDDR2 memory, and 2.4GHz

802.11ac wireless LAN.

The readers replicate authors experiments on the following

testbeds in USA: Chameleon Cloud and CHI@Edge. On Chameleon

CHI@TACC (Cloud server), they use the Skylake [12] machine

equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 6126 CPU 2.60GHz, 12 cores/CPU,

192GB of RAM, and Ethernet network. On CHI@Edge (Edge device),

they use a Raspberry Pi 4 [26], with four BCM2711 Cortex-A72

processing cores running at 1.5GHz, 8GB LPDDR4 memory, and

2.4GHz and 5GHz 802.11ac wireless LAN.

• to understand the impact on performance of Cloud-centric

and Hybrid (Edge+Cloud) processing;

• to show how authors of an article can benefit from KheOps

to make their experiments reproducible;

• to show how readers of an article can leverage KheOps to

replicate the experiments in an article (published using

KheOps).

To reproduce the evaluations in this section, refer to [16].

5.1

Experimental setup

Application performance metrics. The main tracked metric is

the processing time, which refers to the time required to: pre-process

the image captured (e.g., image compression on the Edge device);

transmit the image to the Cloud server; and finally decompress the

image and predict the animal through an AI model. In addition,

we analyze the amount of data transmitted to the Cloud and the

resource consumption (e.g., CPU and memory) on the Edge device.

To increase the accuracy of the results, we measure the pro-

cessing duration 100 times for each experiment, each time with

a different image and an interval of 30 seconds (i.e., Edge devices

transmit images to the Cloud server every 30 seconds). The re-

maining metrics are captured using Dool (Dstat) [3] at application

runtime. All results are presented as the mean followed by their

respective 95% confidence interval.

5.2

How KheOps helps experiment authors

Let us consider the requirements of the experiment authors (a-REQ)

as introduced in Section 1.

a-REQ 1. Execute experiments on heterogeneous comput-

ing resources. KheOps provides access to IoT/Edge devices and

Cloud/HPC resources at large-scale, using the E2Clab methodology.

Supported testbeds include (but are not limited to, as explained in

Section 6.3): Grid’5000, FIT IoT LAB.

a-REQ 2. Systematically describe and explain the experimen-

tal processes and their reasoning. Through Jupyter notebooks

and the E2Clab configuration files, the authors describe and explain

the experiment design choices such as the layers (e.g., Edge and

Cloud), the services (e.g., the Edge client and the Cloud server), the

network constraints, and the application workflow execution. This

is done in Jupyter notebooks by combining text (explaining the

configurations) followed by executable code (E2Clab files).

KheOps replicability metric. To measure how close/precise

readers experiments are from authors experiments, we define the

Replicability Accuracy (𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦) metric. For assessing variabil-

ity and error in results [48], a recommendation is to repeat the

experiments multiple times to achieve narrower inferential error

bars (i.e., confidence interval, standard deviation, etc.) [38]. The

Replicability Accuracy metric is calculated as Equation 1:



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

15Kbit Bandwidth

25Kbit Bandwidth

15Kbit Bandwidth

25Kbit Bandwidth

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

12

12

Processing time (sec)

Processing time (sec)

Processing time (sec)

Processing time (sec)

9

9

6

6

3

3

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

(a) Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB.

(b) Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB.

(c) Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

(d) Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

Figure 6: Cloud-centric vs Edge+Cloud processing: (a, b) executed by authors on Grid’5000 and FIT IoT LAB testbeds; and (c, d)

replicated by readers on Chameleon Cloud and CHI@Edge testbeds.


## Data sent to the Cloud



## Data sent to the Cloud


for the hybrid processing. In the 25Kbit bandwidth configuration,

this difference is lower, 13 seconds and 11 seconds for the Cloud-

centric and Hybrid, respectively. The higher the bandwidth, the

lower will be the difference between the two processing approaches.

This is because image transmission is the most time-consuming task

among the other tasks (i.e., compressing/decompressing images and

model inference).

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120


## Data (kB/s)



## Data (kB/s)


5.2.2

Amount of data sent to the Cloud. According to the


## results presented in Figure 7a, authors observe that the Hybrid


(Edge+Cloud) approach transmits less data (81kB/s on average) to

the Cloud compared to the Cloud-centric approach (96kB/s on aver-

age). This is because, in Hybrid processing, Edge devices compress

images before transmitting them to the Cloud.

(a) Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB.

(b) Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

Figure 7: Amount of data sent to the Cloud regarding the

Cloud-centric and Edge+Cloud processing approaches.

5.2.3

Resource consumption on the Edge device. Results in

Figures 8a and 8b show that there is no significant difference in the

CPU and memory usage in the Edge device when changing between

the Cloud-centric and Hybrid processing approaches. CPU usage

is around 4.2% and 4.4% for Hybrid and Cloud-centric processing,

respectively. Memory usage is around 0.38GB for both.

a-REQ 3. Efficiently configure the experimental infrastruc-

ture and repeat the experiments. All the complexities of config-

uring the Edge-to-Cloud infrastructure, such as leasing computing

resources, mapping the application parts (e.g., Edge and Cloud ser-

vices), enforcing the network constraints, and executing the work-

flow are transparently handled by KheOps. The authors just need

to define their experimental needs in the E2Clab configuration files.

Repeating and adapting the experiments (e.g., changing the network

constraints) is easily done through E2Clab instrumentation.

5.3

How KheOps helps readers

After the authors publish their results, other researchers from a

different lab download the article from a scientific database and

decide to replicate the study on their own premises (e.g., on a

different testbed). Following the same logic, we present how KheOps

helps the readers to replicate the experiments cost-effectively, that

is, according to the readers requirements (r-REQ) in Section 1.

a-REQ 4. Easily share the experiment artifacts in a public

and safe repository. Through the Trovi and JupyterLab integra-

tion, authors can upload their artifacts to the Trovi sharing portal

with a few clicks.

r-REQ 1. Find and access the experiment as simply as find-

ing and reading the paper. Through the KheOps web interface

(step 1 in Figure 4) the readers obtain access to all the public ex-

periments shared by the community and available in Trovi. Then,

they select the experiment shared by the authors of the article to

get more details.

We discuss the experimental results from the authors perspective,

using the three application performance metrics mentioned earlier.

5.2.1

Impact of the network on the processing time. Authors

define two sets of experiments. In the first one (Figure 6a), they fix

the network bandwidth at 15Kbit and vary the processing approach

between Cloud-centric and Hybrid (Edge+Cloud). In the second one

(Figure 6b), they fix the bandwidth at 25Kbit for both processing

approaches.

From the results, the authors observe that the Hybrid (Edge+Cloud)

approach outperforms the Cloud-centric one for both network con-

figurations. In the 15Kbit bandwidth setup, the processing time for

the Cloud-centric is about 27 seconds on average, against 24 seconds

r-REQ 2. Perform the experiment, not just read about it.

Next, in the experiment details web page, readers can launch a

JupyterLab server with artifacts in just a single click (steps 2, 3,

and 4 in Figure 4). Finally, following the experiment instructions

described in the Jupyter notebook, the readers deploy and execute

the experiments on their testbeds, such as (but not limited to): the

Chameleon Cloud and CHI@Edge (step 5 in Figure 4).



KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

CPU usage

Memory usage

CPU usage

Memory usage

6

0.05

6

1.25

5

5

0.04

1.0

4

4

Usage (GB)

Usage (GB)

Usage (%)

Usage (%)

0.03

0.75

3

3

0.02

0.5

2

2

0.01

0.25

1

1

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0.0

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0

Cloud-centric

Edge+Cloud

0.0

(a) Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB.

(b) Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB.

(c) Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

(d) Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

Figure 8: Resource consumption on the Edge device: CPU and Memory usage.

Table 3: Accuracy of replicated experiments.

hybrid processing. In the 25Kbit bandwidth setup, this difference is

lower, 5.5 seconds and 4 seconds for the Cloud-centric and Hybrid,

respectively. Similarly to the authors results, readers also observe

that the higher the bandwidth, the lower will be the difference

between the two processing approaches.

Furthermore, as presented in Table 3, we highlight that readers

obtained a replicability accuracy of 88.2% and 94.3% for 15Kbit and

25Kbit network configurations, respectively.

Metric

Replicability

accuracy

Experiment result

Processing time 15Kbit

0.943

Figure 6a and 6c

Processing time 25Kbit

0.882

Figure 6b and 6d


## Data sent to the cloud


0.973

Figure 7a and 7b

CPU usage

0.978

Figure 8a and 8c

Memory usage

0.996

Figure 8b and 8d

5.3.2

Amount of data sent to the Cloud. According to the


## results presented in Figure 7b, readers observe that the Hybrid


approach transmits less data than the Cloud-centric. The former

transmits around 89.2kB/s and the latter 108.8kB/s. Compressing

images on the Edge helps to reduce the amount of data sent to the

Cloud server. This conclusion is also consistent with the published

article and presents a replicability accuracy of 97.3%.

r-REQ 3. Experiment reasoning: “What”, “Why”, and “How”.

Before running the experiments, the readers can go through the

Jupyter notebook to understand What the experiment does (e.g.,

capture and compress images on Edge devices and then decompress

the images and predict the animals on the Cloud server). The read-

ers can also discover Why the authors set up the experiment with

a 25kbit and 15kbit network bandwidth. Finally, KheOps allows to

understand How the authors interconnect the Edge devices with

the Cloud server (e.g., assigning a public IP to the Cloud server, or

opening firewall rules; using the MQTT protocol; among others).

5.3.3

Resource consumption on the Edge device. Results in

Figures 8c and 8d show that there is no significant difference in the

CPU and memory usage between the Cloud-centric and the Hybrid

processing approaches. CPU usage is around 5.1% and 5% for Hybrid

and Cloud-centric processing, respectively. Memory usage is around

1.1GB for both. We highlight that these conclusions are consistent

with the published article and present a replicability accuracy of

97.8% and 99.6% for CPU and memory usage, respectively.

r-REQ 4. Efficiently configure the experimental infrastruc-

ture. To achieve this, the readers just have to adapt the layers_services

configuration file (presented in Listing 1) to the Chameleon Cloud

and CHI@Edge testbeds. Configuring the network bandwidth to

25kbit and then changing it to 15kbit is as simple as changing the

rate parameter in the network file (Listing 3). Finally, copying data

to the Edge device, interconnecting it with the Cloud server, launch-

ing the application, and finally collecting the results is as simple

as defining the workflow configuration file (Listing 4). The network

and workflow configuration files are testbed agnostic, meaning that

users do not need to update these files when changing the deploy-

ment from Grid’5000 + FIT IoT LAB to Chameleon + CHI@Edge.

Despite readers observing a lower processing time com-

pared to the authors, they could verify that their experiment


## conclusions are consistent with the original study, and their



## results present a high replicability accuracy (see Table 3).


This time difference is expected since readers used a more

powerful Edge device (Raspberry Pi4 against Raspberry Pi3)

for processing the most time-consuming task (e.g., image com-

pression and then transmission). The Raspberry Pi4 has more

RAM memory (8GB vs. 1GB in Raspberry Pi3), a better CPU

(1.5GHz vs. 1.2GHz), network (5GHz vs. 2.4GHz).

Furthermore, regarding the remaining metrics such as the

amount of data sent to the Cloud and the CPU and memory

usage on the Edge device, readers observe small differences

when replicating the original study in different testbeds. This

is due to the different deployment approaches used by each

testbed, for instance, in FIT IoT LAB the Raspberry Pi 3 board

runs an embedded Linux that is built with Yocto [29], while

Next, we report on the replicated experiments.

5.3.1

Impact of the network on the processing time. From

the results in Figures 6c and 6d, readers conclude that the Hybrid

(Edge+Cloud) processing approach outperforms the Cloud-centric

one for both network configurations. This conclusion is consistent

with the results observed in the published article.

Following the analysis, readers observe that in the 15Kbit band-

width network configuration, the processing time for the Cloud-

centric is about 8 seconds on average, against 6.5 seconds for the



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

6.5

KheOps limitations

CHI@Edge is based on Docker [14] containers. Despite that,

the conclusions observed by authors and readers are the same

and present high accuracies.

Next, we discuss future research under the KheOps approach to

help with experiment reproducibility.

Provenance data capture. It may assist in the processes of repro-

ducing complex Edge-to-Cloud workflows [47]. Typically, users

have to execute and repeat various experiments. The output of this

process generates hundreds of data related to the experimental

setup (e.g., hardware, software, code, data set, etc.) and application

workflow execution. Analyzing such data is only possible with the

help of provenance data capture [54].

6


## DISCUSSION


KheOps core elements (i.e., Trovi, JupyterLab, E2Clab) exhibit sev-

eral features that make it a promising environment for advancing

Computing Continuum research through reproducible and replica-

ble experiments. We briefly discuss them here.


## Abstract hardware description. The hardware configuration is


a significant barrier to reproducibility [27], especially in complex

Edge-to-Cloud deployments comprising heterogeneous comput-

ing resources. The description of resources should be in terms of

hardware requirements to execute the experiments (e.g., CPU, GPU,

memory, disk, and network). The goal is to abstract the hardware re-

source description among various testbeds, preventing independent

researchers from knowing about the infrastructure of the original

experimental environment.

6.1

Usability and reusability

KheOps targets usability by allowing users to easily find exper-

iment artifacts shared in Trovi and then to launch experiments

in a JupyterLab server in just a few clicks. KheOps abstracts all

the low-level details of defining and configuring the experimental

environment. It provides a high-level abstraction for mapping ap-

plication parts with the Edge and Cloud infrastructures. Besides,

the configuration files used to define the whole experimental envi-

ronment are designed to be easy to use and understand.

KheOps also targets reusability of the experiment artifacts. For

instance, readers of an article can reuse the authors artifacts to

replicate the study or build upon the existing artifacts to generate

new results. In addition, through E2Clab User-Defined Services, users

can define their own services (e.g., the Edge client and the Cloud

server) with the desired deployment logic (e.g., mapping the services

to the physical machines/devices; installing required software and

packages; etc.). Such services can be shared in this repository [15].

7


## RELATED WORK


We have not found in the literature related work proposing collabo-

rative environments with a focus on the Edge-to-Cloud Continuum.

Closer solutions to KheOps, but without focusing on the Com-

puting Continuum, are Google Colab [18], Kaggle [21], and Code

Ocean [37] as presented in Section 3.

KheOps differs from Google Colab, Kaggle, and Code Ocean

mainly regarding the features presented in Table 2 (limitations)

such as the access to heterogeneous Edge-to-Cloud resources; ac-

cess to large-scale infrastructures; and supporting the experiment

repeatability and reproducibility on the same hardware setup and

replicability in different infrastructures. In addition, KheOps relies

on open scientific testbeds (e.g., Grid5000, FIT IoT LAB, Chameleon,

and CHI@Edge) that are highly reconfigurable and controllable

and designed to support reproducible experiments.

6.2

Analyzing other real-life applications

The KheOps approach is generic in terms of deployment and anal-

ysis of other applications. We highlight that, despite our evalu-

ations focusing on the African savanna use-case, KheOps can be

easily used in other contexts. Supporting new applications can be

achieved by describing and implementing their logic in the User-

Defined Services configuration file.

8


## CONCLUSION


6.3

Integration with other scientific testbeds

KheOps is, to the best of our knowledge, the first collaborative

environment supporting the cost-effective reproducibility of appli-

cations on the Edge-to-Cloud Continuum. It provides simplified


## abstractions for systematically defining and explaining the exper-


imental environment through Jupyter notebooks (e.g., infrastruc-

tures, services, network, and workflow execution); provides access

to heterogeneous computing resources from the IoT/Edge to the

Cloud/HPC; and allows researchers to easily find and share the

experiment artifacts in the Trovi portal.

The experimental validation shows that KheOps helps authors

to make their experiments repeatable and reproducible on the

Grid5000 and FIT IoT LAB testbeds. Furthermore, KheOps helps

readers to cost-effectively replicate authors experiments in different

infrastructures such as Chameleon Cloud + CHI@Edge testbeds,

and obtain the same conclusions with accuracies >88% for all per-

formance metrics.

The KheOps approach is generic with respect to the deployment

testbeds. KheOps allows users to analyze application workflows

on various large-scale scientific testbeds, beyond the four testbeds

used in this work. The definition of the experimental environment

through E2Clab configuration files (e.g., layer_services.yaml, net-

work.yaml, and workflow.yaml) is tesbed agnostic, meaning that a

deployment on the Grid’5000 testbed can be easily replicated in

Chameleon (if the required computing resources are available).

6.4

Reproducibility and artifact availability

The experimental evaluations presented in this work follow a rig-

orous methodology [53] to support reproducible Edge-to-Cloud

experiments on large-scale scientific testbeds. All the experiment

artifacts are publicly available [16] at the Trovi sharing portal and

the results are also publicly available [17] in our GitLab repository.



KheOps: Cost-effective Repeatability, Reproducibility, and Replicability of Edge-to-Cloud Experiments

ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



## 2016. Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th {USENIX}


symposium on operating systems design and implementation ({OSDI} 16). 265–283.

[32] Cedric Adjih, Emmanuel Baccelli, Eric Fleury, Gaetan Harter, Nathalie Mitton,

Thomas Noel, Roger Pissard-Gibollet, Frederic Saint-Marcel, Guillaume Schreiner,

Julien Vandaele, et al. 2015. FIT IoT-LAB: A large scale open experimental IoT

testbed. In 2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT). IEEE,

459–464.

[33] Jason Anderson and Kate Keahey. 2019. A case for integrating experimental con-

tainers with notebooks. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing

Technology and Science (CloudCom). IEEE, 151–158.

[34] L. A. Barba and G. K. Thiruvathukal. 2017. Reproducible Research for Computing

in Science Engineering. Computing in Science Engineering 19, 6 (2017), 85–87.

[35] Raphaël Bolze, Franck Cappello, Eddy Caron, Michel Dayde, Frédéric Desprez,

Emmanuel Jeannot, Yvon Jégou, Stephane Lanteri, Julien Leduc, Nouredine Melab,

Guillaume Mornet, Raymond Namyst, Pascale Primet, Benjamin Quétier, Olivier

Richard, El-Ghazali Talbi, and Iréa Touche. 2006. Grid’5000: A Large Scale And

Highly Reconfigurable Experimental Grid Testbed. International Journal of High

Performance Computing Applications 20, 4 (2006), 481–494. https://doi.org/10.

1177/1094342006070078

[36] Ronan-Alexandre Cherrueau, Marie Delavergne, Alexandre Van Kempen, Adrien

Lebre, Dimitri Pertin, Javier Rojas Balderrama, Anthony Simonet, and Matthieu

Simonin. 2021. Enoslib: A library for experiment-driven research in distributed

computing. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 33, 6 (2021),

1464–1477.

[37] April Clyburne-Sherin, Xu Fei, and Seth Ariel Green. 2019. Computational

reproducibility via containers in psychology. Meta-psychology 3 (2019).

[38] Geoff Cumming, Fiona Fidler, and David L Vaux. 2007. Error bars in experimental

biology. The Journal of cell biology 177, 1 (2007), 7–11.

[39] ETP4HPC. April 29, 2020. ETP4HPC Strategic Research Agenda. https://www.

etp4hpc.eu/sra.html.

[40] Odd Erik Gundersen, Yolanda Gil, and David W Aha. 2018. On reproducible

AI: Towards reproducible research, open science, and digital scholarship in AI

publications. AI magazine 39, 3 (2018), 56–68.

[41] Benjamin Haibe-Kains, George Alexandru Adam, Ahmed Hosny, Farnoosh Kho-

dakarami, Massive Analysis Quality Control (MAQC) Society Board of Direc-

tors Shraddha Thakkar 35 Kusko Rebecca 36 Sansone Susanna-Assunta 37 Tong

Weida 35 Wolfinger Russ D. 38 Mason Christopher E. 39 Jones Wendell 40 Dopazo

Joaquin 41 Furlanello Cesare 42, Levi Waldron, Bo Wang, Chris McIntosh, Anna

Goldenberg, Anshul Kundaje, et al. 2020. Transparency and reproducibility in

artificial intelligence. Nature 586, 7829 (2020), E14–E16.

[42] Kate Keahey. 2020. The Silver Lining. IEEE Internet Computing 24, 4 (2020),

55–59.

[43] Kate Keahey, Jason Anderson, Michael Sherman, Zhuo Zhen, Mark Powers, Isabel

Brunkan, and Adam Cooper. 2021. Chameleon@Edge Community Workshop

Report.

[44] Kate Keahey, Jason Anderson, Zhuo Zhen, Pierre Riteau, Paul Ruth, Dan Stanzione,

Mert Cevik, Jacob Colleran, Haryadi S Gunawi, Cody Hammock, et al. 2020.

Lessons learned from the chameleon testbed. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical

Conference (USENIX ATC 20). 219–233.

[45] Thomas Kluyver, Benjamin Ragan-Kelley, Fernando Pérez, Brian E Granger,

Matthias Bussonnier, Jonathan Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica B Hamrick, Jason

Grout, Sylvain Corlay, et al. 2016. Jupyter Notebooks-a publishing format for

reproducible computational workflows. Vol. 2016.

[46] Matthew S Krafczyk, A Shi, Adhithya Bhaskar, D Marinov, and Victoria Stod-

den. 2021. Learning from reproducing computational results: introducing three

principles and the Reproduction Package. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal

Society A 379, 2197 (2021), 20200069.

[47] Ling Liu and M Tamer Özsu. 2009. Encyclopedia of database systems. Vol. 6.

Springer.

[48] Engineering National Academies of Sciences, Medicine, et al. 2019. Reproducibility

and replicability in science. National Academies Press.

[49] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory

Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. 2019.

Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances

in neural information processing systems 32 (2019), 8026–8037.

[50] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,

Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss,

Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. the

Journal of machine Learning research 12 (2011), 2825–2830.

[51] Daniel Rosendo, Alexandru Costan, Gabriel Antoniu, Matthieu Simonin, Jean-

Christophe Lombardo, Alexis Joly, and Patrick Valduriez. 2021. Reproducible

Performance Optimization of Complex Applications on the Edge-to-Cloud Con-

tinuum. In Cluster 2021 - IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing. Port-

land, OR, United States, 23–34. https://doi.org/10.1109/Cluster48925.2021.00043

[52] Daniel Rosendo, Alexandru Costan, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu. 2022.

Distributed intelligence on the Edge-to-Cloud Continuum: A systematic literature

review. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 166 (Aug. 2022), 71–94.

This work was funded by Inria through the HPC-BigData Inria

Challenge (IPL) and through the UNIFY Associate Team joint in the

framework of the JLESC international lab and the HPDaSc associate

team with Brazil. It was co-funded by the French ANR OverFlow

project (ANR-15- CE25-0003). Experiments presented in this paper

were carried out using the Chameleon Cloud, CHI@Edge, Grid’5000,

and FIT IoT LAB testbeds, supported by a scientific interest group

hosted by several Universities. We also would like to thank Argonne

National Laboratory for supporting this work. This material is based

upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of

Science, under contract number DE-AC02-06CH11357 as well as by

the NSF award 2130889 and NIFA award 2021-67021-33775.


## REFERENCES


[1] [n. d.].

Artifact Review and Badging Version 1.1.

https://www.acm.org/

publications/policies/artifact-review-and-badging-current

[2] [n. d.]. What is Docker Hub? Retrieved Jun 1, 2023 from https://www.docker.

com/products/docker-hub/

[3] 2018. Dool (Dstat) monitoring. Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://github.com/

scottchiefbaker/dool

[4] 2018. GitHub. Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://github.com/

[5] 2018. Zenodo. Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://zenodo.org/

[6] 2019. E2Clab source code.

Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://gitlab.inria.fr/

E2Clab/e2clab

[7] 2023. AI Hub. Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://aihub.cloud.google.com/

[8] 2023. Apache Zeppelin. Retrieved Jan 15, 2023 from https://zeppelin.apache.org/

[9] 2023. Code Ocean Explore: Open Science Library. Retrieved Jan 19, 2023 from

https://codeocean.com/explore

[10] 2023. Colab: Cloud Storage from the command line. Retrieved Jan 18, 2023 from

https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil

[11] 2023. Colab: Google Spreadsheets. Retrieved Jan 18, 2023 from https://github.

com/burnash/gspread#more-examples

[12] 2023.

Compute skylake cluster at CHI@TACC.

Retrieved Feb 16,

2023 from https://www.chameleoncloud.org/hardware/node/sites/tacc/clusters/

chameleon/nodes/0b0bceb9-14bf-423e-890f-3ef187511d71/

[13] 2023. Dahu cluster.

Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from https://www.grid5000.fr/w/

Grenoble:Hardware#dahu

[14] 2023. Docker. Retrieved Jan 18, 2023 from https://www.docker.com/

[15] 2023. E2Clab User Defined Services. Retrieved Feb 8, 2023 from https://gitlab.

inria.fr/E2Clab/user-defined-services

[16] 2023.

Experiment artifacts.

Retrieved Feb 8, 2023 from https:

//www.chameleoncloud.org/experiment/share/347adbf3-7c14-4834-b802-

b45fdd0d9564

[17] 2023. Experiment results.

Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://gitlab.inria.fr/

E2Clab/Paper-Artifacts

[18] 2023. Google Colab. Retrieved Jan 17, 2023 from https://colab.research.google.

com/

[19] 2023. Google Colab: Frequently Asked Questions. Retrieved Jan 18, 2023 from

https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html

[20] 2023.

Google Colab vs Kaggle.

Retrieved Jan 20, 2023 from https://


## datasciencenotebook.org/compare/colab/kaggle


[21] 2023. Kaggle community. Retrieved Jan 19, 2023 from https://www.kaggle.com/

[22] 2023. Kaggle datasets. Retrieved Jan 20, 2023 from https://www.kaggle.com/


## datasets


[23] 2023. MQTT: The Standard for IoT Messaging.

Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from

https://mqtt.org/

[24] 2023. Python zlib. Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from https://docs.python.org/3/library/

zlib.html

[25] 2023. Raspberry Pi 3 Model B.

Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from https://www.iot-

lab.info/docs/boards/raspberry-pi-3/

[26] 2023. Raspberry Pi 4. Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from https://chameleoncloud.org/

experiment/chiedge/hardware-info/

[27] 2023.

SC: The largest Reproducibility Laboratory.

Retrieved Feb 8,

2023 from https://www.chameleoncloud.org/blog/2023/02/20/sc-the-largest-

reproducibility-laboratory/

[28] 2023. Trovi: Practical Open Reproducibility. Retrieved Jan 20, 2023 from https:

//chameleoncloud.gitbook.io/trovi/

[29] 2023. Yocto Project. Retrieved Jan 14, 2023 from https://www.yoctoproject.org/

[30] 2023. Zooniverse dataset. Retrieved Feb 16, 2023 from https://www.zooniverse.

org/organizations/meredithspalmer/snapshot-safari

[31] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey

Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al.



ACM REP’23, June 27–29,2023, Santa Cruz, California

Daniel Rosendo, Kate Keahey, Alexandru Costan, Matthieu Simonin, Patrick Valduriez, and Gabriel Antoniu

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2022.04.004

[53] Daniel Rosendo, Pedro Silva, Matthieu Simonin, Alexandru Costan, and Gabriel

Antoniu. 2020. E2Clab: Exploring the Computing Continuum through Repeatable,

Replicable and Reproducible Edge-to-Cloud Experiments. In Cluster 2020 - IEEE

International Conference on Cluster Computing. Kobe, Japan, 1–11. https://doi.

org/10.1109/CLUSTER49012.2020.00028

[54] Renan Souza, Vítor Silva, Jose J. Camata, Alvaro L. G. A. Coutinho, Patrick

Valduriez, and Marta Mattoso. 2019. Keeping Track of User Steering Actions in

Dynamic Workflows. Future Generation Computer Systems 99 (2019), 624–643.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.05.011

[55] Victoria Stodden, Marcia McNutt, David H Bailey, Ewa Deelman, Yolanda Gil,

Brooks Hanson, Michael A Heroux, John PA Ioannidis, and Michela Taufer. 2016.

Enhancing reproducibility for computational methods. Science 354, 6317 (2016),

1240–1241.

[56] Victoria Stodden and Sheila Miguez. 2014. Best Practices for Computational

Science: Software Infrastructure and Environments for Reproducible and Ex-

tensible Research.

Journal of Open Research Software (Jul 2014).

https:

//openresearchsoftware.metajnl.com/articles/10.5334/jors.ay

[57] Mark D Wilkinson, Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Apple-

ton, Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, Jan-Willem Boiten, Luiz Bonino

da Silva Santos, Philip E Bourne, et al. 2016. The FAIR Guiding Principles for

scientific data management and stewardship. Scientific data 3, 1 (2016), 1–9.