The using of bibliometric analysis to classify trends and

future directions on “Smart Farm”

Paweena Suebsombut1,2, Aicha Sekhari2, Pradorn Sureepong1, Pittawat Ueasangkomsate3 and Abdelaziz Bouras4

1College of Arts Media and Technology, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand

{Paweena.Suebsombut@univ-lyon2.fr}{dorn@camt.info}

2University Lumiere Lyon 2, Bron, France {aicha.sekhari@univ-lyon2.fr}



3Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand {pittawat.uea@gmail.com}

4Qatar University {abdelaziz.bouras@qu.edu.qa}


## Abstract—Climate change has affected the cultivation in all countries


with extreme drought, flooding, higher temperature, and changes in the

season thus leaving behind the uncontrolled production. Consequently,

the smart farm has become part of the crucial trend that is needed for

application in certain farm areas. The aims of smart farm are to control

and to enhance food production and productivity, and to increase

farmers’ profits. The advantages in applying smart farm will improve

the quality of production, supporting the farm workers, and better

utilization of resources. This study aims to explore the research trends

and identify research clusters on smart farm using bibliometric analysis

that has supported farming to improve the quality of farm production.

The bibliometric analysis is the method to explore the relationship of the

articles from a co-citation network of the articles and then science

mapping is used to identify clusters in the relationship. This study

examines the selected research articles in the smart farm field. The area

of research in smart farm is categorized into two clusters that are soil

carbon emission from farming activity, food security and farm

management by using a VOSviewer tool with keywords related to

research articles on smart farm, agriculture, supply chain, knowledge

management, traceability, and product lifecycle management from Web

of Science (WOS) and Scopus online database. The major cluster of

smart farm research is the soil carbon emission from farming activity

which impacts on climate change that affects food production and

productivity. The contribution is to identify the trends on smart farm to

develop research in the future by means of bibliometric analysis.

management optimization of inputs in a farm field according

to veritable needs of crop that are composed of data-based

technologies, including remote sensing, internet, and satellite-

positioning systems like GPS, to manage crops and to reduce

the use of water, fertilizers, and pesticides.

According to the prediction of the Food and Agriculture

Organization (FAO), the world population will increase by

about 1,500 million people in the next 40 years that

emphasizes on the necessity and importance to increase the

awareness on quality, quantity, and sufficiency of food for the

population in the world [2]. Balancing between population

growths and the food supply is the aim of food security. Food

safety includes food loss which refers to obtaining an unusual

reduction in quality such as wilting, contusion or lost before

reaching the consumer.  Also, food waste which refers to

good quality of food and suitable for consumption, but it is

discarded. Food loss normally occurs in the food value chain

at the production stage, storage stage, processing and

distribution stages, and is the unpremeditated result of

infrastructure, technical limitation or farm processes in

storage, packaging and marketing. Food waste generally

occurs in the food value chain at the consumption and retail

stages, and is the result of a conscious decision or negligence

when throwing food away [1]. The transparency of food

safety should become near the real-time which is quite

challenging.

Therefore,

new

chain

cooperation

and

applications can lead to a more responsive and dynamic food

production network. This can be accomplished by an attempt

on making an appropriate distribution of food to all parts of

the world.

Keywords— Smart Farm, Climate Change, Food Safety, Supply

Chain, Knowledge Management, Product Lifecycle Management

I.


## INTRODUCTION


Smart farm, defined by Alliance for Internet of Things

Innovation (AIOTI), is data gathering, data processing, data


## analysis and automation technologies application on the


overall value chain.  This unique approach allows

management and operation improvement of a farm with

respect to real time and re-use of these data including animal,

plant, and soil to improve food security which refers to the

awareness and prevention of foodborne illnesses from food

production to consumption, and chain optimization to deliver

more productive and sustainable farm production based on

more accurate and resource-efficient approach supported by

Internet of Things (IoT) technologies [1]. From the farmer‟s

point of view, smart farm should provide added value of

productivity to farmers that are strongly related to cultivation

and livestock farm in both large and small-scale farmers

having new and more precise tools to produce more

productivity, and also provide the benefits in terms of

environmental issue [1]. Therefore, smart farm is the

But the food safety is at risk due to unpredictable

environmental situation, such as climate change, which is a

major problem for cultivation and livestock. Climate change

can create unwanted risks to the environment.  The

consequences of experiencing heavy rainfalls, more extreme

droughts, flooding, and the increasing in emissions of

greenhouse gases resulting from human activities can abruptly

change the seasonal life cycle events of plants and animal

livestock [2]. From the Intergovernmental Panel in Climate

Change (IPCC) report in 2010, the emissions of Global

Greenhouse Gas by forestry, agriculture, and other land use

sector is around 24% excluding CO2 [3]; this is shown in

figure1. Mostly greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural

sector occur from agriculture in both cultivation and



livestock, and deforestation to make way for cultivation of

crops and livestock. Moreover, the shifting distribution of

pests and diseases also has an impact on food production in

the future.

competitiveness, the Government plan to grow agriculture by

investing $4 billion to their farmers for helping farmers

innovate an extension of the Rural R&D, thus providing

agreements of export trade can help farmers to get benefit of

the trade opportunities, and providing more encourage to

communities can help farmers to build resilience of drought

[6].

The USA spent a lot of money to improve farm production

and productivity. For The Fiscal Year 2015, The United

States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is the U.S. federal

executive

department

responsible

for

executing

and

developing federal laws which relates to farming, agriculture,

food, and forestry that spend around $140 billion budget for

the agricultural sector [7]. Furthermore, the Department of

Agriculture (USDA) has a budget $24.6 billion to invest in

rural communities, rural youth, start-up projects for farmers

and ranchers, agricultural research in nutrition assistance,

food safety, vulnerable populations, and natural resources [8].

Farming is the major source of food and avocation for lots of

poor families especially in Asia to contribute the economic

output. One of third accounting of the Gross Domestic

Product (GDP) of Myanmar, Lao, and Cambodia in 2010 is

39.9%, 30%, and 28% respectively. In Cambodia, over 60.3%

of the labor force is provided, which is close to percent of the

labor force in Vietnam (49.5%), and over percent of the labor

force in Thailand, Indonesia, and Philippines which are

41.3%, 38.3%, and 33.6% respectively in 2010 [9]. From the

effect of climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel in

Climate Change (IPCC) finds that the agriculture sector of

Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam can be

prospective to result 2.2% in the GDP of mean drop in 2100

[9].  Therefore, countries in Asia try the adoption of

technology that is geared towards improving production and

productivity: such an example is Japan which paid $46.5

billion in subvention to farmers and continued, whereas the

state help of farmers in Japan remains a argumentative issue

in 2009 [10]. The key goal in agricultural sector of African

Union is to establish 25 million climate smart farmers by

2025 to achieve shared prosperity and improve the livelihoods

of the African population [11]. The technologies are adopted

to improve their productivity and sustainable production.

Figure1. Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions [3]



From these impacts there is a negative result in the limited

number of crops grown and starvation for the livestock which

is raised. One way to counter the risk from devastating the

operation of farming is to apply the concept of smart farm

technology, which is used in farms to analyze and manage

farms by following the farms‟ conditions. Smart farm

technology is composed of a variety of different technological

implementations and information, such as smart sensing and

monitoring, smart control, could-based computing, smart


## analysis and planning that are applied in a variety of areas in


the world, which has an effect of climate change for

improving production. Therefore, a country does not have to

be concern about the increase of food production which could

further increase the emissions of global greenhouse gas from

agricultural activities. Meanwhile, changing the way of

production in farm is one solution for many food producers

for adapting to the climate change. In developing countries,

the gross domestic product (GDP) of agriculture sector

accounts for 29% and provides jobs for 65% of their

populations [4]. From a climate change viewpoint, smart farm

is important and is adopted in every country to improve food

production and productivity. In European nations more than

200 projects related to smart farm are supported by the

Horizon 2020 idea which is a European funding initiative in

agriculture and forestry conservation. In 2016-2017, the

Horizon 2020 offers a budget of €560 million to boost farm

productivity and sustainability [5]. The aims are to improve

the capacity of food and farming systems, providing sufficient

and healthy food, while safeguarding natural resources. The

projects relate to applying the IoT technologies in

smallholders and large farms for gathering data from farm,

analyzing, and farm management. Australia is also one of the

world leaders in agricultural innovation. Farmers in Australia

adopt smart technologies that are supported by researchers,

industry groups, and other stakeholders. This enthusiasm for

change and innovation has helped Australian agriculture to

retain its competitive edge over other producers. The exports

in agriculture sector of Australia are more than $40 billion

value of goods in each year and are essential to continuing

economic strength of Australia. To assure Australia‟s ongoing

Furthermore, several countries also try to promote smart

farm into an organic farm, especially in the development for

sustainability farming that can reduce insecticides and

pesticides usage which have a negative effect to the

environment, consumers, and food safety. Almost 44 million

hectares of agricultural land is operated in the form of an

organic farm in 172 countries whereas 11 countries have more

than 10 percent organic agricultural land [12].  The most

organic agricultural land in 2014 is Australia with 17.2

million hectares. The main organic crops are cereals,

vegetables, green podders, oilseeds, coffee, dried pulses,

olives, grapes, nuts, and cacao [12].

This study reveals and explores the smart farm that has

supported farming in the world including researches, projects,

advantages, and limitation of smart farm. It consists of four

further sections. The research trends on smart farm will be



presented in section 2 which explains each cluster of smart

farm by using biliometric analysis. Section 3 is a use case of

smart farm which describes and gives an example of a use

case of adoption smart farm into a real field.  Finally, the


## conclusion and discussion are described in section 4.


documents for clustering research on smart farm. Finally, the

bibliometric map is created to understand a research trends

and to explain their relationship. The history of the number of

published articles on smart farm issues from 1998 to 2016

(access on January to November 2016) is illustrated on

Figure2. The publications in this research field increased from

1 article in 2007 to 14 articles in 2009 then suddenly

decreased in 2010 and increased again from 18 articles in

2012 to 75 articles in 2015. There were 75 articles in 2015

and 54 articles from January to November 2016 published in

this field. The total number of published articles in this field

from 2008 to 2016 is 287 articles with a 93.53% increasing

rate of article published. From 294 selected articles, the

frequencies of citation list are illustrated in Table1 that shows

the number of citations for the top ten cited articles. The

articles are often referenced in research on soil Carbon

Emissions from farming activity and Food Security and Farm

management.

II. RESEARCHES TRENDS ON SMART FARM

This section presents the methodology for clustering

research trends by using bibliometric analysis which can be

used to analyze the scientific domain [13] following 3 steps

by using the VOSviewer tool. The first step is conducting a


## data collection from an online database that are related to


research articles on smart farm, agriculture, supply chain,

knowledge management, traceability, and product life cycle

management from the ISI WOS online database over the year

1991-2016 and Scopus online database over the year 1960-

2016 comprising information for analysis about journals

article, theses, and books. The next step, Co-citation unit


## analysis is selected to measure the relationship between cited


Figure2. Distribution of articles by Year Publications

Table1. Top ten of frequencies of citation



Figure3. Two clusters for research on smart farm

Figure3 illustrated the co-citation map is created by the

VOSviewer tool.  The total of 188 articles are found from co-

citation network that can be classified in two clusters; Soil

Carbon emissions from farming activities, and food security

and farm management. Each cluster is demonstrated in a

relationship between the cited documents via number of

frequencies that is shown in Table1. Therefore, the research

field of soil carbon emission from farming activities is the

major cluster that can explore the research trends in a smart

farm.



A. Soil Carbon Emissions from farming activity

The rotation of crop can influence the soil Carbon stocks by

changing the quality and quantity of organic substance input.

All operation for tillage affects to Carbon emission involving

mechanical soil disturbance for seedbed preparation depending

on various factors comprising properties of soil, tractor size,

depth of tillage and implementation used [18]. The irrigation is

significant to achieve higher yields in semiarid and arid

regions. The irrigated cropland is 17% leading to 40% of total

production on a global scale. The Carbon emission in irrigation

is a very precise practice which is 23% of the on-farm energy

used in being estimated for crop production. For example,

energy requirement of on-farm pumping in the USA for

pumping water depends on various factors composing of the

total dynamic head which is based on system pressure, water

lift, the rate of water flow, pipe friction, and the efficiency of

pumping system [19].

In this cluster, the researchers focus on the emissions of soil

carbon which have occurred from farming activities. The

emission of soil carbon and modern farming are the major

drivers of climate change and is accelerating the rate of

biodiversity loss that have already exceeded the boundaries of

the Earth [14] that affects food security.

Therefore, decreasing losses from enhancing the use in

efficiency of all these inputs can help to reduce Carbon

emission indications. The management options that contribute

to CO2 emissions from farming activities are reducing or

eliminating soil tillage (no-till) and increasing cropping

intensification and

plant production

efficiency.

No-till

promotes the formation of insubordinate soil organic matter

(SOM) fractions within stabilized micro-aggregate and macro-

aggregate structures, and increases aggregate stability [20].



B. Food Security and Farm management

The carbon sink capacity of soil degradation which is a soil

quality in terms of the capacity of the soil to produce goods or

services [15] and farming activities of the world is 50 to 66%

of the carbon loss in history which is 42 to 78 gigatons (Gt) of

carbon [16]. The Emissions of the soil carbon from farming

activities are relative with cultivation practice and crop type

which are generated from three sources which are production

and fertilizers application, pesticides, and irrigation, using

machine for cultivating the land, and the soil organic carbon

(SOC) that is oxidized from soil infestation [17]. The world

soil carbon pool of 2500 Gt includes about 950 Gt of soil

inorganic carbon (SIC) and 1550 Gt of soil organic carbon

(SOC). Conversion of natural to farming ecosystems also

causes a reduction of the SOC pool by 75% or more in

cultivated soils of the tropics regions and 60% in soils of

temperate regions [16].

This cluster includes two sub-clusters that are food security

and farm management. Food security is a major priority at

national and household level for the poor and political stability

welfare. The demands of consumer are presently the main

drivers to encourage food industries to produce healthier and

safe food products for the highest possible quality

specifications. Governments representing their developed

country have adopted several strategies comprising of

government markets intervention, endeavors to enhance

production, and public distribution of food and preservation of

national food security stocks [21]. To develop agriculture

sector, there have commitments of $20 billion over three years.

The Carbon emission from the machinery used for

fertilizers, pesticides, and irrigation depends on amounts of

fertilizers, pesticides, and irrigation of each crop that varies

among crop rotations, crop types, and tillage practices [17].



Furthermore, the funding approaching $30 billion in the period

2010-2012 resulted from the commitments of the Copenhagen

Accord, and by 2020 the goal of funding and additional $100

billion annually for helping developing countries react to

climate change comprising adaption and mitigation for getting

more productivity and sustainable [22].

analytics, robotics, and sensor technology. These tools can

make a major difference to crop yields, quality of crop, and

profits of rural farmers. Australia uses robotic into dairy

operations which is a project in Camden, South-West of

Australia that 90 cows can be milked an hour. The duration

and volume of its last milking are recorded and transmitted

from a dongle that is put around the cow neck. So, farmers can

access all data and monitor yield and production records via

their iPads [26]. Japan tries to apply robots to automate crop

farms and pick fruits. The temperature, humidity, carbon

dioxide levels, light sources, and sterilizing water are

controlled by automated system. The ripe strawberries and

tomatoes can be recognized by robot fruit picker machines

based on the color. The robot will calculate the distance

between arms and fruit for harvesting without bruising the

fruit, and harvest faster than farmers [26]. In Thailand,

researchers in Mahidol University adopted drones to monitor

crop conditions, ground robots to measure the soil nutrients,

and weather forecast system to report farmers about changing

of weather that can help farmers to reduce wastage in

agriculture, to reduce the farming cost, and to decrease the

effect on the environment [26]. The Fuse Technologies

platform is a global collaboration between DuPont Pioneer and

AGCO Corporation including European countries, the United

States, Brazil, and Canada which is a global leader in the

design, manufacture and distribution of agricultural equipment.

The wireless data transfer technology is a solution for leading

markets in agriculture.

The data

interface and

farm

management information are required for the system to make

the whole-farm decision which is designed to help farmers

enhance their productivity and profit. The task

file

management system allows farmers securely and appropriately

into transferring task files between station and farm machines

via wireless transferring [27]. A part in the North West of Italy

applies a wireless sensor network controlling irrigation and

enhances fertilization methods on corn crops that are

composed of wind vane, anemometer, and pluviometer

sensors.

The

conditions

of

micro-local

weather,

air

temperature, direction and intensity of wind, rain level,

wetness of leaf, moisture and temperature of soil at 0.5 meters

depth can be monitored [28]. The Smart Agriculture project for

Organic Farms in UK was deployed in 9 farms located across

the UK in which gainful data for predicting measurements and

events are recorded via wireless sensor network and GPRS

communication that can be helped agronomists and farmers

saving money and time [29].

To secure the farm productivity, the farm management is

important. Currently, the management tasks in farm are

moving to a new model, requiring more empathy on the

interaction with the environmental effect, and quality of

documentation and growing conditions. Generally, the change

of conditions for the management tasks in farm has enforced

the monitoring system activities and information systems to

secure allowance with the limitations and standards of

particular production guidelines, management standards as

prerequisites for subsidies, and provisions for environmental

approbation

[23].

Most

farmers

have

handled

with

management

load

by

trying

to

manipulate

manual

information‟s mass for making the correct decisions. So that,

computers and the internet usage can help to enhance and

mitigate the task of manipulating and internal information

processing as well as achieving external information [23].

Several methods and technologies are used to improve farm

management that helps farmers to make a decision, manage

farms, and improve farm production and productivity. In North

China, over 50% nation‟s total area is dryland regions where

low fertility soil, adverse weather, water resource and

topography

conditions

are

the

limitation

of

farming

development. The conservation tillage in dryland regions is

developed by reduction tillage practice that helps to increase

water use efficiency and crop yields with up to 35% [24]. The

European countries have an infrastructure planned for future

internet by the European Future Internet Initiative (EFII) by

merging Public–Private Partnership (FIPPP) with a purpose of

essentially developing the implementation and realization of

Future Internet services and establishing a European scale

markets by integrating communications functionality for smart

infrastructures by 2015 [25]. Farm Management Information

System (FMIS) which is a system to collect, process, store, and

disseminate is necessary information to manage the functions

of farm operations, collects farm profile and data related to

product traceability from consumers that applies advanced

Future Internet characteristics. This work attempts to

capacitate a farmer to pace into a new verity, where they

become a veritable. The Future Internet services are pioneered

optimized methods providing to manage all tasks in a farm for

entering the global markets [25]. This cluster includes a

research done on food security and its method for farm

management that can help farmers manage their farms more

efficiently.

Consequently, various smart farm technologies and

management are adopted in farming to control and improve

production and productivity that can help farmers to reduce

time, increase farmers‟ profits, reduce carbon emission.

However, the smart farm still has a limitation for farming

depending on the restriction of each country such as the

absence of physical communication infrastructures especially

in rural areas, knowledge technology of farmers, cost of

devices, marketing, and supply chain management. All

countries try to reduce the limitation for the farmers and

infrastructure.

III. USE CASES OF SMART FARM

There are numerous cases used on smart farm that every

country tries to adopt for improving their farming practice in

cultivation and livestock. Countries in Asia are launching

national strategies to promote the farm automation with data



[13] Van Eck, Nees Jan, and Ludo Waltman. "Software survey: VOSviewer, a

IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

computer program for bibliometric mapping." Scientometrics 84.2

(2010): 523-538.

[14] Rockstr€om, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin, F.S.,

This paper revealed the current trends on smart farm

including cultivation and livestock in both the research project

and on the cases applied in the world. The research articles

which are discussed in the paper are collected from Scopus and

ISI WOS online databases. The first result comprises the

distribution of articles based on the yearly publications. The

number of publication on smart farm issue has grown evidently

from 1998 to 2016 (access on January to November 2016). The

relationship between the articles is measured via a co-citation

unit by using a VOSviewer tool. The results of this mapping

show the relationship between the cited articles with two

clusters that are soil carbon emission from farming activity,

and food security and farm management. The major trends on

smart farm is related to soil carbon emission from farming

activity that has an impact on the climate change, which also

includes applying smart farm to mitigates the effect from

climate change and to increase the quality of soil and farm

productivity following the food security concept. The

limitation of this paper is presenting the research trends on

smart farm based on model of co-citation mapping. For future

research, the statistical analysis will be improved to confirm

this relationship.

Lambin, E.F., Lenton, T.M., Scheffer, M., Folke, C., Schellnhuber, H.J.,

Nykvist, B., de Wit, C.A., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H.,

S€orlin, S., Snyder, P.K., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M.,

Karlberg, L., Corell, R.W., Fabry, V.J., Hansen, J., Walker, B.,

Liverman, D., Richardson, K., Crutzen, P., Foley, J.A., 2009. A safe

operating space for humanity. Nature 461, 472e475.

[15] Reeves, D. W. "The role of soil organic matter in maintaining soil quality

in continuous cropping systems." Soil and Tillage Research 43.1 (1997):

131-167.

[16] Lal, Rattan. "Soil carbon sequestration impacts on global climate change

and food security." science 304.5677 (2004): 1623-1627.

[17] West, Tristram O., and Gregg Marland. "A synthesis of carbon

sequestration, carbon emissions, and net carbon flux in agriculture:

comparing tillage practices in the United States." Agriculture,

Ecosystems & Environment 91.1 (2002): 217-232.

[18] Lal, Rattan. "Carbon emission from farm operations." Environment

international 30.7 (2004): 981-990.

[19] Albrecht, Alain, and Serigne T. Kandji. "Carbon sequestration in tropical

agroforestry systems." Agriculture, ecosystems & environment 99.1

(2003): 15-27.

[20] Paustian, K., et al. "Management options for reducing CO2 emissions

from agricultural soils." Biogeochemistry 48.1 (2000): 147-163.

[21] Del Ninno, Carlo, Paul A. Dorosh, and Kalanidhi Subbarao. "Food aid,

domestic policy and food security: Contrasting experiences from South

Asia and sub-Saharan Africa." Food Policy 32.4 (2007): 413-435.

[22] McCarthy, Nancy, Leslie Lipper, and Giacomo Branca. "Climate-smart

agriculture: smallholder adoption and implications for climate change

adaptation and mitigation." Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture

Working Paper 3 (2011): 1-37.

[23] Sørensen, C. G., et al. "Conceptual model of a future farm management

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to acknowledge the support of University

Lumiere Lyon 2, France, College of Arts, Media and Technology,

Chiang Mai University, Thailand, Kasetsart University, Bangkok

Thailand, and Qatar University, Qatar. We also would like to

acknowledge all of our colleagues who worked together and provided

encouragement to the authors.

information system." Computers and electronics in agriculture 72.1

(2010): 37-47.

[24] Wang, X. B., et al. "Developments in conservation tillage in rainfed

regions of North China." Soil and Tillage Research 93.2 (2007): 239-250.

[25] Kaloxylos, Alexandros, et al. "Farm management systems and the Future

Internet era." Computers and electronics in agriculture 89 (2012): 130-

144.

[26] Website:https://govinsider.asia/smart-gov/why-is-smart-farming-


## REFERENCES


suddenly-so-cool/ (Access on 20 November 2016)

[27] Website:http://blog.agcocorp.com/tag/smart-farming/ (Access on 20

[1] Alliance for Internet of  Things Innovation (AIOTI), „Smart Farming and

November 2016)

[28] Website:http://www.libelium.com/precision-farming-to-control-

Food Safety Internet of Things Applications – Challenges for Large Scale

Implementations AIOTI WG06 – Smart Farming and Food Safety‟ 2015

[2]  Beecham Research Ltd., “Towards Smart Farm Agricultural Embracing

irrigation-and-improve-fertilization-strategies-on-corn-crops/ (Access on

21 November 2016)

[29] Website:http://www.libelium.com/smart-agriculture-project-for-organic-

The IoT Vision,”  BRL Smart Farming Exclusive Summary, 2014

(http://beechamresearch.com/)

[3] Website:https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/global-greenhouse-gas-

farms-in-uk/ (Access on 21 November 2016)

emissions-data (Access on 14 November 2016)

[4] Website:https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-

factbook/fields/2116.html (Access on 15 November 2016)

[5] EIP-AGRI Agriculture and innovation, “Funding opportunities under

Horizon 2020 Calls 2016,” 2016

[6] Website:http://budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/glossies/jobs-

growth/html/jobs-growth-05.htm (Access on 15 November 2016)

[7] Website:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Department_of_Ag

riculture (Access on 16 November 2016)

[8] Website:http://www.usda.gov/documents/usda-fy17-budget-factsheet.pdf

(Access on 17 November 2016)

[9] Policy Paper, “HARMLESS HARVEST: How sustainable agriculture

can help ASEAN countries adapt to a changing climate,” P. 1-19, May

2015

[10] Website:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agricultural_subsidy#Africa

(Access on 17 November 2016)

[11] News Editor in Air/Climate, Food, Latest News, RSS, “”Africa Seeks 25

Million Climate Smart Farmers by 2025,” 2016

[12] Helga Willer and Julia Lernoud, Research Institute of Organic

Agriculture (FiBL), “Organic Agriculture Worldwide 2016: Current

Statistics,” 2016