The disruption index suffers from citation inflation

and is confounded by shifts in scholarly citation practice

Alexander Michael Petersena,,1 Felber Arroyave,1 and Fabio Pammolli2

1Department of Management of Complex Systems, Ernest and Julio Gallo Management Program,

School of Engineering, University of California, Merced, California 95343, USA

2Politecnico Milano, Department of Management, Economics and Industrial Engineering, Via Lambruschini, 4/B, 20156, Milan, Italy

Measuring the rate of innovation in academia and industry is fundamental to monitoring the efficiency and

competitiveness of the knowledge economy. To this end, a disruption index (CD) was recently developed and

applied to publication and patent citation networks (Wu et al., Nature 2019; Park et al., Nature 2023). Here

we show that CD systematically decreases over time due to secular growth in research and patent production,

following two distinct mechanisms unrelated to innovation – one behavioral and the other structural. Whereas

the behavioral explanation reflects shifts associated with techno-social factors (e.g. self-citation practices), the

structural explanation follows from ‘citation inflation’ (CI), an inextricable feature of real citation networks

attributable to increasing reference list lengths, which causes CD to systematically decrease. We demonstrate

this causal link by way of mathematical deduction, computational simulation, multi-variate regression, and

quasi-experimental comparison of the disruptiveness of PNAS versus PNAS Plus articles, which differ only in

their lengths. Accordingly, we analyze CD data available in the SciSciNet database and find that disruptiveness

incrementally increased from 2005-2015, and that the negative relationship between disruption and team-size

is remarkably small in overall magnitude effect size, and shifts from negative to positive for team size ≥8

coauthors.

arXiv:2406.15311v1  [cs.DL]  21 Jun 2024

Keywords: Disruption index, innovation, secular growth, measurement bias, quasi-experiment

One sentence summary: The disruption index is susceptible to measurement error, which calls into question a growing body

of research employing CD to measure innovation trends and identify co-factors associated with team assembly.


## Introduction


Disruptive innovation refers to intellectual and industrial breakthroughs that sidestep conventional theory or practice by ap-

pealing to new value networks, to the extent that the disruptive entrants can quickly and unexpectedly overcome the competitive

advantages characteristic of established incumbents [1]. In the case of scientific advancement, the process of disruptive in-

novation manifests as intellectual contributions that appeal to novel configurations of concepts and methods belonging to the

knowledge network [2–4], thereby substituting prior combinatorial knowledge `a la Schumpeter’s theory of creative destruction

[5]. Against this backdrop, scholars recently developed an index for quantifying citation disruption (denoted by CD) according

to the implicit value of intellectual attribution that is encoded within the local structure of citation networks [6], with the objec-

tive of identifying intellectual contributions that appeal to new streams of intellectual attribution while subverting established

ones.

Identifying the micro-level processes underlying disruption and quantifying its overall rate are fundamental to understanding

scientific progress, and can in principle guide the management of institutions and policies that accelerate innovation. As such,

the CD index has received considerable attention and inspired a significant volume of follow-up research. However, there is

a growing literature that challenges the definition and application of CD to real scientific and patent citation networks [7–13].

One stream of critique calls into question the long-term temporal decline in CD reported by [14], and the morose interpretation

of its implications on the status and outlook of the scientific endeavor [13, 15]. In particular, Macher et al. [10] identify a

substantial number of missing patent citations in the data analyzed in [14], both at the beginning of their data sample and

towards the end, which effectively reduces the number of backwards (i.e. references) and forward citations that were analyzed.

Once correcting for the data omission, the re-analysis reveals an increasing rate of disruption in several patent domains central

to the techno-informatic revolution of the last 30 years [3].

Similarly, a recent and independent re-analysis by Holst et al. [13] shows that missing citations in the scientific publication


## data, which are more prominent in the early years of the sample, give rise to a subsample of publications with 0 references (which


by definition correspond to maximum disruption value of CD = 1). They show that the prevalence of these temporally biased


## data anomalies are entirely sufficient to generate the negative trend in CD reported by [14]; upon correcting for these anomalies,


they show that CD trends insubstantial for both patents and publications. A third independent study of scientific publications

by Bentley et al. also report an accelerating rate of disruption at the end of their data sample after developing a weighted variant

[a] Send correspondence to: apetersen3@ucmerced.edu



2

of CD that accounts for temporal shifts in the connectivity of real citation networks [11]. In addition to these studies reporting

an increasing rate of innovation according to temporal patterns in the citation network, a complementary approach based upon

measuring combinatorial innovation in the knowledge network also reports a persistent innovation rate over time [4].

A second stream of critique focuses on how CD is defined, and the implications of its mathematical formulation on its

reliability in bibliometric analysis [7–9, 16, 17]. Taken together, these considerations further call into question a number of

studies reporting statistical relationships between CD and various covariates related to research production and team assembly

– such as career productivity, team size, citation impact, and the geographic dispersion of team members [14, 18, 18–21] – most

notably because each of these covariates also grows with time. Statistical relationships between CD and other time-dependent

covariates are susceptible to omitted variable bias, which is a formidable source of measurement error in statistical analysis. As

such, the connection between these two streams is the role of secular growth, which manifests as a temporal bias that underlies

the data artifacts generating declining trends in CD and the susceptibility of CD to measurement error due to its non-linear

dependence on the structure and rate of backwards citations.

Against this backdrop, here we contribute to these two streams by demonstrating how systematic measurement bias deriving

from the inextricable densification of empirical citation networks, combined with omitted variables capturing confounding shifts

in scholarly citation practice, further contributes to the mismeasurement of a “decline in disruptiveness” [14]. Our critique is

centered upon the role of reference list in the definition of CD, and the implications of multifold increases in reference list

lengths over the last half century, which is a fundamental source of ‘citation inflation’ (CI) [22]. Specifically, we apply four

complementary methodologies that expose the underlying bias in CD definition and its application – deductive quantitative

reasoning, computational modeling, a quasi-experimental test, and multivariate regression – the results of which are consistent

with a companion study [9] based upon different data sources and regression model specification.

In order to test and validate the CI hypothesis – that increasing reference list lengths confound the measurement of trends

in CD and covariate relationships – we developed a quasi-experiment based upon the entire corpus of research published in

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS) over the 5-year period 2011-2015.

Our identification strategy is based around comparing research articles published in the traditional format (print and online

publication) to those published as long-form PNAS Plus articles (online-only publication) [23, 24] – as these two publication

formats are nearly indistinguishable, aside from the longer reference list lengths of PNAS Plus articles. We conclude with a

large-scale multivariable regression analysis of 7.8 million articles from 1995-2015, which accounts for the data quality and

measurement biases identified, thereby improving upon the methodological designs employed in [14, 19]. Results show that

(a) the net effect size of temporal and team-size trends are at the level of noise and therefore inconsequential to science and

innovation policy; and (b) by including appropriate controls and focusing on the metric itself instead of percentile values, the

relationship between CD and team size is instead increasing.


## Background & Related Literature


Definition of CD and its susceptibility to secular growth

The disruption index CDp [6, 14] measures the degree to which an intellectual contribution p (e.g. a patent or academic research

publication) supersedes the sources cited in its reference list, denoted by the set {r}p. The argument for CDp is that if future

contributions cite p but do not cite members of {r}p, then p plays a disruptive role in the citation network. As such, disruption

can be inferred according to the local structure of the subnetwork {r}p ∪p ∪{c}p that includes the set of citing nodes {c}p

connecting to either the focal node p or any member of {r}p. According to its definition [6, 14] reformulated as a ratio [19], CDp

is calculated by identifying three non-overlapping subsets of {c}p = {c}i ∪{c}j ∪{c}k, of sizes Ni, Nj and Nk, respectively –

see Fig. 1(a,b) for a schematic illustration. In practice, a citation window (CW) is used to temper the effects of right-censoring

bias, such that only citations occurring within a CW-year period are included in the subnetwork {c}p. In what follows, we

employ a CW = 5-year window denoted by CDp,5, as in prior research [14, 19]; however, the fundamental issues with the

definition of CD are independent of CW [9], and so for brevity we represent the general definition by CDp.

The subset i refers to members of {c}p that cite the focal p but do not cite any elements of {r}p, and thus measures the degree

to which p disrupts the flow of attribution to members of {r}p. The subset j refers to members of {c}p that cite both p and {r}p,

measuring the degree of consolidation that manifests as triadic closure in the subnetwork (i.e., triangles formed between {r}p,

p, {c}j). The subset k refers to members of {c}p that cite {r}p but do not cite p. As such, [19] show that CDp can be calculated

as the ratio

CDp =

Ni −Nj

Ni + Nj + Nk

= CDnok

1 + Rk

,

(1)

where the second equivalence is a simple re-organization of the equation to highlight the extensive quantity

Rk = Nk/(Ni + Nj) ∈[0, ∞), which measures the rate of extraneous citation. Such re-organization facilitates deduc-

ing the scaling behavior of CD associated with the number of articles n(t) and the average reference list length per article

r(t) per year t. According to the scaling of network growth, Rk ∝r(t) because Nk ∼n(t)r(t) and Ni + Nj ∼n(t), which

is empirically validated in [9]. Hence, because the ratio CDnok = (Ni −Nj)/(Ni + Nj) ∈[−1, 1] is an intensive measure,



3

CDp thus features a numerator that is bounded and a denominator that is unbounded – and so CDp(t) converges to 0 over time

because Rk grows proportional r(t). Moreover, even alternate disruption definitions such as CDnok are biased, because shifts

in scholarly practice that manifest as network autocorrelations, such as self citation and journal impact-factor boosting, increase

the overall rate of consolidation (triadic closure) measured by the term Nj.

Citation inflation: a measurement bias deriving from secular growth

Citation inflation (CI) refers to the exponential growth of citations produced via the secular growth of the scientific endeavor

[22]. Figure 1(c) illustrates how CI arises through the combination of increasing reference lists, denoted by r(t), and increasing

publication (or patenting) rates, denoted by n(t), which significantly increases the density of citation networks over time. In

the case of scientific research production, empirical growth rates estimated from the entire Clarivate Analytics Web of Science

citation network show that total volume of citations generated by the scientific literature, C(t), grows exponentially with annual

rate gC = gn+gr = 0.051; hence, the number of links in the citation network is growing by roughly 5% annually, corresponding

to a doubling period of just ln(2)/gC = 13.6 years [2].

Moreover, as references tend to increasingly extend further back in time [2], the impacts of CI are not constrained to

contemporaneous layers of the citation network, but instead are cross-generational. As such, the increasing density of citation

networks manifests at both the source (reference) and destination (citation) of each new link, which is a temporal bias that is

challenging to neutralize in the development of standardized network metrics. For example, in the 1980s the median-cited paper

received 2 citations within 5 years of publication; however by the 2000s, this nominal quantity increased to 9 [2]. In addition,

there has been a paradigm shift towards online publishing that has facilitated greater publication volumes, faster publication

times, and longer articles with longer reference lists. Take for example the journal Nature for which n(t) has been roughly

constant over the last 60 years: in 1970 the average number of references per articles was rp = 7; by 2000 rp increased to 24;

and by 2020 rp = 51, a 7-fold increase over the 60-year period – see Fig. 1(d) and Fig. S1 in the Supplemental Information.

Issues with prior works analyzing trends in CD

Park et al. [14] develop four robustness check approaches: comparison with alternative definitions of CD, normalization of

Nk in CD, regression adjustment, and synthetic randomization of the citation network. Yet each is susceptible to either data

quality issues that are temporally biased towards early years, or measurement bias and omitted variable bias associated with the

definition of CD.

First, because alternative disruption variants, namely CDnok and CD∗[7, 17], are constructed around similar ratios, they are

also susceptible to data quality issues as well as CI. However, it is notable that the alternative indices are less susceptible to CI,

and indeed their trends shown in Extended Data Fig. 7 of [14] are markedly less prominent than what is shown for CD. In

the particular case of CDnok, the location of the average value is large enough that a vast majority of papers are classified as

disruptive – which begs for improvement. Moreover, in our companion study focusing upon a computational model, we show

that even the tempered decline in CDnok can be attributed to CI [9] .

Second, in order to attenuate the effect of CI, Park et al. [14] develop both ‘paper’ and ‘field x year’ normalized variants of

CD by modifying the factor Nk in Eq. (1). In the first case, they replace Nk with Nk −rp. However, according to scaling

behavior arguments, since Nk ∼n(t)r(t) then (Nk −rp) ∼(n(t)r(t) −rp) ≈(n(t) −1)r(t), which does not generate the

intended consequence. Moreover, the reduction of Nk by rp still renders these normalized variants susceptible to the scenario

exhibited in Fig. 1(a,b), whereby citing just a single highly-cited paper causes Nk to vastly exceed the difference Ni −Nj in

the numerator of CD, such that CDp →0. In the second case of the field-year normalized variant, the average r(t) for papers

from the same field and year are subtracted, which amounts to the same issue, Nk −r(t) ∼n(t)r(t) −r(t) = (n(t) −1)r(t).

Third, the regression adjustment implemented by [14] is poorly documented, as there is no model specification; moreover,

Extended Table 8 only shows the estimated coefficients for the year indicator variable, and does not show the estimates for other

controls. And according to Extended Data Table 1 in [14], their model specification does not incorporate available publication-

level factors that co-vary with CDp, namely rp, cp and the number of coauthors, kp.

And finally, robustness checks based upon rewired citation networks are insufficient since the degree-preserving randomization

holds constant rp or cp. Hence, this randomization scheme can only be expected to attenuate biases attributable to correlated

citation behavior – contrariwise, biases deriving from data quality issues and CI can be expected to persist. Moreover, because

shuffling the citation network reduces the rate of triadic closure to random chance, then this null model essentially converts all Nj

links into Ni links. Consequently, the expected randomized value is CDRand

p

= ((Ni+Nj)−0)/(Ni+Nj+Nk) = 1/(1+Rk) >

0, which is positive definite and converges to 0 as Rk increases. Park et al. then calculate a Z-score comparing the real and

randomized values, Zp = (CDp −CDRand

p

)/σ[CDRand

p

], and plot the average value over time in Extended Data Fig. 8 [14].

Their results show extremely negative Z-score values (upwards of 2σ effect sizes). These deviations are also methodological

artifacts: since CDRand

p

> 0, then all papers with CDp < 0 deterministically yield Zp < 0; moreover, the standard deviation

σ[CDRand

p

] is extremely small because the chances of the randomization producing triadic closure is extremely small. Hence,

with little variation to work with around a systematically small value CDRand

p

≈1/(1 + Rk) ∼1/r(t) , this randomization

approach vastly underestimates the intrinsic scale of variation, i.e., σ[CDRand

p

] ≪σ[CDp].



4

In a different study on the relationship between CD and team size, Wu et al. [19] also develop robustness checks based

upon multi-variate regression. However there is no clear model specification provided in their Supplementary Table 4; hence, in

addition to omitting cp and rp, it is unclear how they controlled for publication year. Moreover, the majority of their analysis

is based upon descriptive trend analysis using percentile values of CD. This mapping of nominal CD values to percentiles

obfuscates the extremely narrow distribution of CD. At the same time, this modification of dependent variable generates the

appearance of considerable effect sizes. Because most publications are concentrated around relatively small CD values, a small

idiosyncratic shift in CD will generate disproportionately large shifts in the percentile value.

A third study analyzes the relationship between CD and collaboration distance among coauthors [21]. This analysis also

omits cp and rp from their multivariate robustness check (see Extended Data Table 1), and instead categorize papers as being

before or after 2000 (a crude temporal control) and being solo-author or not (a crude team size control). As an example of

persistent negligence for confounding factors, Lin et al. write: “For example, the 1953 paper on DNA by Watson and Crick is

among the most disruptive works (D = 0.96, top 1%), whereas the 2001 paper on the human genome by the International Human

Genome Sequencing Consortium is highly developing (D = -0.017, bottom 6%).” Yet these papers are from vastly different

socio-technological eras, with the former produced by two coauthors citing rp = 6 prior works, where the latter is attributed to

200+ coauthors and cites rp = 452 prior works.

Additionally, results reported in [21] are based upon the relative rates of CD > 0 versus CD < 0. This dependent variable

is simply the sign of CD, which only depends on the numerator difference, Ni −Nj. While this choice may at first appear to

be less susceptible to CI, it is still susceptible to the data quality issues identified by [10, 13], as well as confounding trends in

the rate of triadic closure attributable to shifts in self-citation and other correlated citation behavior, which are more prominent

in larger teams – and larger teams are more likely to be extended across larger distances.

In response to these issues, two streams of critique have emerged regarding research on CD – one regards data quality issues

and the other regards methodological issues. Regarding the former, citation networks based upon publication and patent data

are susceptible to missing references, citations, and the classification of non-research oriented content (e.g. editorials) as the

products of dedicated research. These data quality issues are more frequent for older publications, and less so for newer ones, as

the modern publication industry benefits from information system features that were not available in the past (e.g. Digital Object

Identifiers, and the web-based publication). As demonstrated by [13], the frequency of publications and patents with 0 references

is highly concentrated during early years. They show that this systematic bias in data quality contributes significantly to the

decline in CD, since papers and patents with rp = 0 correspond to maximum disruption, CDp = (Ni −0)/(Ni + 0 + 0) = 1.

Similarly, [10] show that left-censoring bias in US patent data means that patents from early years are artificially missing


## references to patents before the starting date of the dataset; upon correcting for these omitted references, which increases rp


closer to their true value, then the decline in CD for patents is greatly reduced.

A second stream of critique regards the methodological choices, e.g. omitted variables and the susceptibility of CD to secular

growth. By way of example, Bentley et al. [11] modify the definition of CDp to account for CI according to both the number of

publications n(t) and the total number of citations produced, C(t) = n(t)r(t). Their re-analysis reveals an increasing weighted

CD from the early 1990s through 2013. They also critique the results of [14] based upon natural language analysis, which also

is susceptible to secular trends affecting the usage frequency and fashion of words.

To summarize, several recent analyses report findings of the following form: as X increases, CD decreases (where X is time,

individual publication rate, team size, nominal citations, and collaboration distance) [14, 18–21]. Accordingly, we conjecture that

any variable X(t) that increases over time will generate correlations of this pattern – yet the degree to which such correlations

survive confounders and wether they represent significant effect sizes is a more intriguing matter. To this end, here we seek

to consolidate a growing number of critiques – first by addressing methodological issues, and concluding with a regression

framework that also addresses the data quality issues.


## Results


Computational model incorporating CI

We use a tested and validated mechanistic citation network growth model [2] to compare average trends in CD calculated for

synthetic networks generated with and without CI, which are otherwise identical in their construction. This generative citation

network model belongs to the class of growth and redirection models [25, 26] and implements stochastic link dynamics that

mimic preferential attachment [26], while also incorporating other latent features of scientific production, in particular the

exponential growth of n(t) and r(t). This model reproduces a number of statistical regularities established for real citation

networks – both structural (e.g. a log-normal citation distribution [27]) and dynamical (e.g., increasing reference age with time

[2]; exponential citation life-cycle decay [28]).

Network growth in this model is governed by two complementary citation mechanisms that can be completely controlled by

tunable parameters: (i) direct citation and (ii) redirected citation [2, 9]. The second mechanism (ii) gives controls the rate of

triadic closure in the synthetic citation network, thereby capturing correlated shifts in scholarly citation practice, such as citation

trails illuminated by web-based hyperlinks that make it easier to find and cite prior literature; and self-citation among individuals

and journals aimed at increasing their prominence in the attention economy. Moreover, the ‘consolidation’ measured by Nj

in CDp explicitly measures the number of citations that feature triadic closure. In related work focusing on the details of this



5

computation model [9], we find that CI has a stronger role than redirection in explaining the decline in CD5(t), and so in what

follows we focus on the effects of CI.

Accordingly, here we focus on the network growth parameters that determine the rate of CI, which thereby facilitates measur-

ing the impact of secular growth on two trends: (a) the decline in the average CDp,5 value in year t, denoted by CD5(t); and (b)

the scaling hypothesis connecting the rate of extraneous citations featured in the denominator of Eq. (1) to the average number

of references per paper, Rk(t) ∝r(t). Note that the increase in r(t) manifests from secular growth as well as shifts in scholarly

citation practice. For example, papers with more authors tend have longer reference lists [9], partly because larger teams tend to

write longer papers, but also because there are more authors seeking to benefit from self-citation.

Hence, we use the computational model to the CI hypothesis by generating two distinct network ensembles, each comprised

of 10 random networks grown over t = 1...T periods (representative of publication years), terminating the network growth at

T ≡150. Each network realization is seeded with common initial conditions – e.g. the initial cohort features n(1) = 30 nodes,

each with r(1) = 5 references. These synthetic citation networks are available for cross-validation, and can be used to develop

alternative scientometrics that are neutral to CI [29].

By construction, both network ensembles are statistically identical for the first 107 periods – see Fig. 2. The first ensemble

incorporates the empirical rates gn = 0.033 and gr = 0.018 for the entire T ≡150 periods, with networks reaching a final

size of N = 125, 270 nodes and 5,948,492 links with rp ≡r(t = 150) = 73 after 150 periods. The second ensemble features

the same gn and thus reaches the same final size of N = 125, 270 nodes. However, the growth of r(t) is suddenly quenched at

T ∗= 108 to gr = 0, such that r(t) = 34 for t ≥T ∗, which effectively ‘turns off’ CI attributable to growing reference lists –

see Fig. S2(a,b). This sudden hault represents a hypothetical scenario in which journals were to impose a hard cap on reference

list lengths in order to temper CI. Such caps are not inconceivable, as Nature provides a soft policy that “articles typically have

no more than 50 references” in their formatting guide for authors.

Figure 2(a) compares the average CD5(t) for these two scenarios, which reproduces the magnitude of empirical decline

reported in [14] for t < T ∗. However, the two curves diverge for t ≥T ∗, with the curve featuring quenched reference lists

suddenly reversing course, thereby revealing the acute effect of CI on CD. Similarly, Fig. 1(b) tracks the growth of Rk(t),

showing that this quantity is extensive when r(t) is growing, and intensive when r(t) is constant. Figure S2(c-f) confirm the

relationship Rk(t) ∝r(t), and show that the proportionality is independent of the citation window (CW) used for calculating

CDCW (t); see [9] for additional empirical validation based upon a different dataset. Accordingly, our simplified network

model demonstrates that CI fully controls the trends in CD(t).

Quasi-experimental validation of the citation inflation hypothesis: Empirical analysis of |CDp,5|

Computational ‘toy models’ are designed to capture the essential parameters underlying observed variation, while neglecting

those features that are perceived to be non-essential. However, an unavoidable limitation to such approaches is determining what

exactly are the essential parameters. For example, in our parsimonious growth model we do not account for various sources of

heterogeneity underlying scientific publication, such as team size and reference list lengths, which both extending from just a

few to several hundreds. Instead, all synthetic publications in our model from the same year have the same number of references,

rp = r(t) ≡average reference list length, so that we can rule out variation in this feature as a cause for the effect we are seeking

to understand. Hence, in order to further test the CI hypothesis in an empirical setting, we again resort to a simplified scenario.

Specifically, we exploit the 2011 launch of a strategic publishing model developed by the journal PNAS, consisting of a long-

form online-only publishing option – called PNAS Plus – to complement its traditional print option [24]. Article submissions

were not processed, reviewed or prioritized according to the author-designated print option [23], and so publications in these

two formats are satisfactory counterfactuals for testing wether publications with larger rp are biased towards smaller CDp. To

demonstrate this causal link, we juxtapose the two sets of articles that are otherwise indistinguishable, on average, aside from

PNAS Plus articles having longer reference lists.

Because computing CDp,5 requires 5 years of post-publication citation data, in what follows we compare the disruptiveness

of 18,644 research articles published in PNAS from 2011-2015. Notably, online-only PNAS Plus articles feature a different page

numbering system, and so by inspecting this metadata for each article we identified 12.6% of the total sample as PNAS Plus

articles. While the difference in the average |CDp,5| is incremental, the PNAS Plus articles do have smaller disruption values

in magnitude across the bulk of the sample distribution – see Fig. 3(a,b). In terms of relevant citation network characteristics

related to CDp, PNAS Plus articles differ primarily in terms of rp, as they feature 100 × (57 −41)/41 = 39% more references

per article, on average. Otherwise, the two subsamples are nearly indistinguishable in terms of citation impact (cp,5) and team

size (kp) – see Fig. S3.

We exploit this quasi-experimental setting in order to distinguish between the following behavioral (i) and statistical (ii & iii)

mechanisms that could contribute to declines in CD:

(i) Nj > Ni: the main hypothesis for explaining the decline in CD put forward by Park et al. [14] is that there have been

fundamental shifts in scientific practice that have shifted away from disruptive science towards consolidating science.

However, they do not eliminate the possibility that Ni is growing faster than Nj, on average, due to behavioral shifts

affecting scholarly citation practice. Hence, increasing rates of Nj relative to Ni, may follow from a number of competing

practical mechanisms, which they do discuss, but do not distinguish.



6

(ii) Statistical ‘large N’ convergence of CD: The distribution of CD is extremely concentrated around the centroid value of


## 0. Hence, it is possible that (Ni −Nj) →0 as c(t) ≫1 and r(t) ≫1 increase over time, representing a statistical limit


associated with increasing network density. Note that this candidate mechanism is reflected by the numerator of CD in

Eq. (1). Such statistical convergence would explain the very small variance in the CDp,5 distribution, which is extremely

leptokurtic – see Fig. S4;

(iii) Citation inflation: as Rk ≫1, CD converges to 0 (since the numerator of CD is bounded). Unlike (ii), the source of this

statistical mechanism is in the denominator of Eq. (1).

Park et al. [14] primarily attribute the observed decline in CD to shifting balance of disruptive innovation captured by mechanism

(i). However, they do not rule out mechanisms (ii) or (iii), which are not related to the innovation capacity of the scientific

enterprise, but instead reflect the susceptibility of the CD metric to statistical bias. Hence, we empirically test the CI hypothesis

using a simplified CD metric, |CDp,5|, which is not sensitive to mechanism (i). This modification is not dissimilar to the

choice of alternative disruption metric employed by Lin et al. [21], who base their results on the sign of CD, which avoids the

measurement bias associated with mechanism (iii).

We test the relationship between |CDp,5| and various covariates using the model specification employed in our companion

study [9] (which is based upon a different dataset). Instead, here we use publicly available publication metadata from the

SciSciNet open data repository [30], which features pre-calculated CDp,5, kp, rp. We use the following multivariate linear

regression model,

|CDp,5| = bt + bk ln kp + br ln rp + bc ln cp,5 + ϵt .

(2)

which accounts for team size and the most relevant scalar citation network quantities relating to CD. We estimate the parameters

of the model using the STATA 13 package “xtreg fe” using publication-year fixed effects; each covariate enters in logarithm to

temper the right-skew in the distribution of each variable. For the full list of parameter estimates see Table S1. We also tested

the robustness of the parameter estimates by applying the same model to a larger sample of journals, comprised of 6.9 million

articles from the same period, 2011-2015, which shows consistent results across a larger range of journals – see Table S2.


## Results show a negative relationship between |CDp,5| and rp: br = −0.0039; p = 0.002; 95% CI = [ -0.0055 -0.0023] which


further supports the CI hypothesis. Put in real terms, a paper with twice as many references (2rp) has a |CDp,5| value that is

br ln(2) = −0.002 smaller than if it had rp references. This scenario corresponds to a 0.6σ effect size, as the joint standard

deviation across both PNAS subsamples is σ[|CDp,5|] = 0.0065. Notably, the sign, magnitude, statistical significance level of

br is consistent with the analog coefficient reported in [31]. The relationship between |CDp,5| and kp are not robust in sign,

which is likely attributable to the small effect size compounded by the non-linear increasing relationship between kp and rp over

time [9], which we address in the following section.

Moreover, this model facilitates estimating the differences in |CDp,5| between the PNAS and PNAS Plus deriving solely from

the differences in rp. Our results show that 100% of the difference in the average |CDp,5| between the two journal subsets are

explained by δ, the difference in the average rp across the two subsets – see Fig. 3(c). Hence, these empirical results definitively

demonstrate that a significant portion of variation in CD is attributable to variation in rp. For this reason, the main results

reported in [14] survived their robustness checks, e.g. the random rewiring they employed conserves rp, and Extended Table 1

and Supplementary Table 3 show that they did not include rp, kp or kp as publication-level covariates of CD.

Empirical analysis of CD from 1995-2015

There is considerable disagreement emerging from research analyzing the relationships between CD and various other factors.

For example, [19] mainly rely on descriptive methods to establish a negative relationship between CDp and the team size, kp.

Instead, [9] and [31] employ multivariate regression and report a positive relationship, and no relationship between CDp and kp,

respectively. One reason for the discrepancy emerging in the literature is a lack of consistency in the data and methodological

specifications.

Hence, in this section we re-analyze publication-level temporal trends [14] and team-size trends [19] in CDp,5 using pre-

generated and publicly available citation network data from SciSciNet [30]. For consistency, we apply the same general model

specification developed in the previous sections and also applied in [9]. Furthermore, we restrict our analysis to publications that

feature explicit signatures of research outcomes – namely, those with sufficiently large rp that we can be confident that they are

not editorials, commentaries, book reviews or other non-research based content that may be misclassified as such. This selection

also excludes publications featuring substantial missing network data [10], since these data quality issues effectively reduce rp,

and consequently give rise to spuriously large ±CD; this selection also avoids the issue deriving from the surprisingly frequent

singularity identified by Holst [13] whereby papers with rp = 0 generate CDp = 1. As such, we focus on the components of the

citation network that are both conceivably and consequentially disruptive, in line with the originator’s definition of disruption

representing a form of breakthrough innovation [1].

With this in mind, we ranked journals over the period 1995-2015 according to the number of publications with 10 ≤rp ≤200.

We then analyze publications from the top 1000 most prominent journals, which also satisfy the following criteria: team sizes



7

in the range 1 ≤kp ≤25, and citation counts in the range 1 ≤cp,5 ≤1000. This exclusion produces a 0.26% decrease in

the sample size, resulting in 7,819,889 publications. By focusing on prominent journals, we can also calculate a journal-year

normalized disruption index,

NormCDp,5,j,t = CDp,5,j,t −CDj,t

σ[CD]j,t

,

(3)

where CDj,t is the average CD value and σ[CD]j,t is the standard deviation calculated for publications from journal j in year t.

As such, this normalized disruption metric controls for year-specific factors such as journal publication modality (online, print,

hybrid), as well as the characteristic value and variation CD according to the discipline associated with j, etc. As a final data

quality assurance, we exclude publications with |NormCDp,5,j,t| ≥5, which corresponds to just a 0.66% decrease in the sample

size. The resulting sample is comprised of 7,768,207 publications (comprising 99% of the original data sample), with the most

productive (least productive) journal featuring 138,883 (respectively, 3371) publications over the 21-year period.

Following these data quality refinements, we then re-analyze the temporal trend in CD using the following model specifica-

tion,

CDp,5,j,t = bj + bk ln kp + bk2(ln kp)2 + bk×t(ln kp × t) + br ln rp + br2(ln rp)2 + bc ln cp,5 + bc2(ln cp,5)2 + γt + ϵj , (4)

which incorporates squared terms to account for non-linear relationships. For example, because Nk ∼n(t)r(t) appears in the

denominator of CD, a linear correction for rp is insufficient. The coefficient br = −0.0033 (p-value < 0.001; 95% CI =[-0.0042,

-0.0025]) is negative, reflecting the residual impact of CI. For the full list of parameter estimates see Table S3.

Figure 4(a) shows the trend in the factor variable γt, which captures year-specific trends that persist in spite of the publication-

level controls. Note that the regression adjustment robustness checks reported in Supplementary Table 1 of [14] does not report

any of the field-year and paper-level controls, and so it is not possible to validate our results according to their covariates; in

particular, they not include the covariates rp, kp and cp,5 in their model specification. The results of our reanalysis indicates that

the residual trend in CD(t) associated with time is at the level of noise, with the uptick in the regression adjusted CD(t) after

2008 corresponding to just 0.06σ effect size relative to the baseline level in 1995.

In order to evaluate team-size trends, we leverage the journal-year normalized disruption index NormCD to estimate the

standardized parameters of the model

NormCDp,5,j,t = bt + γk + br ln rp + br2(ln rp)2 + bc ln cp,5 + bc2(ln cp,5)2 + ϵt .

(5)

As such, coefficients are measured in units of σ[CD]j,t, which facilitates assessing the relative magnitude of effect sizes. The

interaction term represented by (ln kp × t) controls for the tendency of larger teams to produce longer papers with longer


## reference lists [9]. After controlling for temporal variation and CI, we find that CD increases (albeit weakly) with team size


(for kp ∈[3, 25]) – which is consistent with a statistically significant and positive coefficient associated with ln rp identified in

our companion study [9]. As with the temporal trend, the net effect is at the level of noise, with the difference between kp = 2

and kp = 25 corresponding to just a 0.09σ effect size. These results are in stark contrast with [19]. One source of discrepancy

is the methodology, as their descriptive analysis does not account for multivariable interactions. Moreover, Wu et al. base their


## analysis upon differentials in the percentile values of CDp,5, which obscures the relatively small magnitude of the effect size


obtained for nominal CD values, which are extremely narrowly distributed around CD = 0, as illustrated in Fig. S4.


## Discussion


A growing body of research seeks to relate CDp to time-dependent covariates such as team size [19], novelty [31], the

geographic dispersion of team members [21], and citation impact [20] – all are quantities that have systematically increased

over time. A common pattern among these studies is a result of the form: as X increases, CD decreases. However, this class

of results naturally follows from the susceptibility of correlations between X(t) and CD(t) to (a) temporal biases associated

with the secular growth of the scientific enterprise, and (b) temporal biases associated with increasing data quality of the citation

network data over time.


## Data quality issues deriving from missing citations and references is a fundamental source of error identified by [10, 13]


that explains the anomalous decline in CD reported by [14]. In the re-analysis by Macher et al. [10], missing references at

the beginning of the patent data artificially reduce rp for early patents; upon correcting for their omission, which effectively

increases rp for those early patents, the negative trend in CD largely disappears. Similarly, Holst et al. [13] show that a

significant source of systematic error follows from including items with rp = 0 that generate CDp = 1 outliers. They show

that these anomalies tend to occur earlier in the publication and patent datasets. Upon correcting these issues, they also show

that the negative trend in CD largely disappears. This second re-analysis also provides the full set of coefficients estimated in

their regression adjustment analysis, which shows a negative correlation between CDp and rp (β1 in Table S1 of [13]). Indeed,

these data quality issues give rise to the same net effect as CI. Beyond data quality issues, another issue are the small effect



8

sizes between CD and covariates. Our re-analysis of temporal trends and team-size trends generate effect sizes at the 0.06σ and

0.09σ level, respectively; moreover, the directions of the trends are opposite of what was previously reported [14, 19].

To summarize, even in the absence of data quality issues, the CD index decreases over time due to two mechanisms unrelated

to innovation – one behavioral, and the other structural. Importantly, the disruption index does not account for confounding

shifts in citation behavior (e.g. self-citation, impact factor boosting) that increase the rate of triadic closure measured by Nj in

the numerator of CD. Thus, decreases in CD could follow from a number of competing mechanisms, some behavioral, others

statistical in nature. Hence, in this work we began by testing the ‘CI hypothesis’ that underlies the structural mechanism. Indeed,

shifts in strategic behavior and normative practice are challenging to directly measure. For this reason, we confront this issue

via computational simulation in our companion work [9]. And in order to guide the development of unbiased citation-network

metrics, we make available an ensemble of synthetic citation networks so that they can be used to test future citation-based

indices for systematic bias [29].

In short, our mixed method approaches consistently demonstrate that CI causes the denominator of CD defined in Eq. (1)

to systematically increase as reference lengths increase over time, which causes CD to converge to 0. According to its present

definition, there is no clear way to correct for this dependence, since CDp is non-linearly related to rp via the factor Nk. This

susceptibility is illustrated in Fig. 1, which shows how a publication (or patent) needs to only cite one highly-cited publication

for Nk to increase to the extent that CD →0 independent of the difference Ni −Nj. The likelihood and magnitude of this

one-off mechanism is increasing over time as a result of CI [2]. Yet this issue even affects publications from the same cohort

that have significantly different rp. As a case example, we juxtaposed the disruptiveness of PNAS versus PNAS Plus articles

published from 2011-2015, which differ primarily in their article lengths. Results show that nearly all of the difference in

disruptiveness is attributable to the PNAS Plus articles having larger rp on account of their extended online-only publication

format. Hence, a significant amount of the variation in CD derives from variation in rp, which could follow simply from

journal-specific constraints on article lengths. By way of example, our analysis based upon normalized shows that the covariate

with the largest effect size is rp, which features a 0.14σ effect size for each unit change in ln rp – see Table S4.

We conclude by suggesting a policy consideration for managing the scientific publishing enterprise, namely caps on reference

list lengths to temper the effects of CI in research evaluation (see [2] for computational modeling that instead explores the

implications of a sudden increase in r(t), i.e. simulating the emergence of online-only mega-journals and their impact on the

citation network). Such limits on rp appear to cure the systematic decrease in CD(t) [9], and could simultaneously address

other shortcomings in citation practice such as surgical self-citation by authors [32] and institutional collectives [33], and journal

impact-factor boosting [34, 35].

Author contributions

AMP designed the research, performed the research, participated in the writing of the manuscript, collected, analyzed, and

visualized data. FA and FP contributed to the manuscript. AMP and FP designed the research.

Competing interests

We declare no competing financial interests.


## Data and materials availability


Synthetic citation networks and code for analyzing them are available in the Dryad open data repository: DOI: 10.6071/M3G674.


## Data used for the multivariate regression analysis, including the disruption index CDp,5, cp,5, kp and rp, were obtained from the


SciSciNet open data repository [30].



9

[1] Christensen C, Raynor ME, McDonald R (2015) What is disruptive innovation? Harvard Business Review Dec.:3–11.

[2] Pan RK, Petersen AM, Pammolli F, Fortunato S (2018) The memory of science: Inflation, myopia, and the knowledge network. Journal

of Informetrics 12:656–678.

[3] Yang D, Pavlidis I, Petersen AM (2023) Biomedical convergence facilitated by the emergence of technological and informatic capabilities.

Advances in Complex Systems 26:2350003.

[4] Petersen AM (2022) Evolution of recombinant biomedical innovation quantified via billions of distinct article-level MeSH keyword

combinations. Advances in Complex Systems 24:2150016.

[5] Schumpeter JA (1942) Capitalism, socialism and democracy (Harper & Brothers, New York, NY).

[6] Funk RJ, Owen-Smith J (2017) A dynamic network measure of technological change. Management science 63:791–817.

[7] Bornmann L, Devarakonda S, Tekles A, Chacko G (2020) Are disruption index indicators convergently valid? The comparison of several

indicator variants with assessments by peers. Quantitative Science Studies 1:1242–1259.

[8] Ruan X, Lyu D, Gong K, Cheng Y, Li J (2021) Rethinking the disruption index as a measure of scientific and technological advances.

Technological Forecasting and Social Change 172:121071.

[9] Petersen AM, Arroyave F, Pammolli F (2023) The disruption index is biased by citation inflation. e-print arXiv:2306.01949 pp 1–14.

[10] Macher JT, Rutzer C, Weder R (2024) Is there a secular decline in disruptive patents? Correcting for measurement bias. Research Policy

53:104992.

[11] Bentley RA, et al. (2023) Is disruption decreasing, or is it accelerating? Advances in Complex Systems 26:23500066.

[12] Leibel C, Bornmann L (2024) What do we know about the disruption indicator in scientometrics? an overview of the literature. Sciento-

metrics 129:601–639.

[13] Holst V, Algaba A, Tori F, Wenmackers S, Ginis V (2024) Dataset artefacts are the hidden drivers of the declining disruptiveness in

science. arXiv e-print: 2402.14583.

[14] Park M, Leahey E, Funk RJ (2023) Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time. Nature 613:138–144.

[15] Kozlov M (2023) ’Disruptive’science has declined-and no one knows why. Nature 613:225–225.

[16] Wu S, Wu Q (2019) A confusing definition of disruption. SocArXiv e-print: 10.31235/osf.io/d3wpk.

[17] Leydesdorff L, Tekles A, Bornmann L (2021) A proposal to revise the disruption index. El profesional de la informaci´on (EPI) 30.

[18] Li H, Tessone CJ, Zeng A (2024) Productive scientists are associated with lower disruption in scientific publishing. Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences 121:e2322462121.

[19] Wu L, Wang D, Evans JA (2019) Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology. Nature 566:378–382.

[20] Wang R, Zhou Y, Zeng A (2023) Evaluating scientists by citation and disruption of their representative works. Scientometrics 128:1689–

1710.

[21] Lin Y, Frey CB, Wu L (2023) Remote collaboration fuses fewer breakthrough ideas. Nature 623:987–991.

[22] Petersen AM, Pan RK, Pammolli F, Fortunato S (2018) Methods to account for citation inflation in research evaluation. Research Policy

48:1855–1865.

[23] Verma IM (2012) PNAS Plus: Refining a successful experiment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109:13469–13469.

[24] Schekman R (2010) Creating a new option for online-only research articles: PNAS Plus. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 107:15309–15309.

[25] Krapivsky PL, Redner S (2005) Network growth by copying. Phys. Rev. E 71:036118.

[26] Barabasi A (2016) Network Science (Cambridge University Press).

[27] Radicchi F, Fortunato S, Castellano C (2008) Universality of citation distributions: Toward an objective measure of scientific impact.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:17268–17272.

[28] Petersen AM, et al. (2014) Reputation and impact in academic careers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111:15316–15321.

[29] Petersen AM (2023) The disruption index suffers from citation inflation and is confounded by shifts in scholarly citation practice: syn-

thetic citation networks for bibliometric null models. (https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.6071/M3G674).

[30] Lin Z, Yin Y, Liu L, Wang D (2023) SciSciNet: A large-scale open data lake for the science of science research. Scientific Data 10:315.

[31] Leahey E, Lee J, Funk RJ (2023) What types of novelty are most disruptive? American Sociological Review 88:562–597.

[32] Ioannidis JP, Baas J, Klavans R, Boyack KW (2019) A standardized citation metrics author database annotated for scientific field. PLoS

biology 17:e3000384.

[33] Tang L, Shapira P, Youtie J (2015) Is there a clubbing effect underlying Chinese research citation increases? Journal of the Association

for Information Science and Technology 66:1923–1932.

[34] Martin BR (2016) Editors’ JIF-boosting stratagems–Which are appropriate and which not? Research Policy 45:1–7.

[35] Ioannidis JP, Thombs BD (2019) A user’s guide to inflated and manipulated impact factors. European journal of clinical investigation

49:e13151.



10

a

c

{c}i

{c}j

{c}k

n(t)

Inﬂation of the reference supply

due to growth of r(t) and n(t)

r(t)

publication pa

Median-cited

paper

in 1980s

{r}p

2020

2000

1980

b

d

{c}i

{c}j

{c}k

Ave. reference list length, !rp ± σr

Nature

60

40

publication pb

20

60-year average

Median-cited

paper in

2000s

= 22 references

1960

1980

2000

2020

0

{r}p

Year, t

FIG. 1: Citation inflation is an inextricable feature of citation networks. The disruption index CDp is calculated according to three non-

overlapping subsets of {c}p = {c}i ∪{c}j ∪{c}k, of sizes Ni, Nj and Nk, respectively. (a,b) Schematic of the citation network sub-graph

contributing to the calculation of the disruption index for two papers that differ only in the connectivity of the single reference contributing to

Nk. Moreover, in order to convey the magnitude and impact of secular growth as it manifests on real citation networks, the subset {c}k for

publication pa is characteristic of citation rates in the 1980s, whereas for pb it is characteristic of the 2000s. Consequently, CDa = 0.69 and

CDb = 0.45, corresponding to a 35% decrease in CD attributable to 20 years of increasing citation network density. (c) Schematic illustrating

the inflation of the reference supply owing to the fact that the annual publication rate n(t) (comprised of increasingly variable article lengths),

along with the number of references per publication r(t), have grown exponentially over time. Consequently, the observed densification is both

within- and across-generation, such that older publications can receive more citations from present day research than from contemporaneous

research due to secular growth. (d) Citation inflation even affects journal with relatively small change in n(t), such as traditional print journals

like Nature, which have witnessed 7-fold increases in reference list lengths over the last 60 years.

b

a

extraneous citation, ￼Rk(t)

12

Average rate of

0.3

Average ￼CD5(t)

8

0.2

Citation inflation (CI) Model

0.1

4

CI Model with no CI after ￼T* = 108

T* = 108

T* = 108

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0.0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Model period (year), t

Model period (year), t

FIG. 2: Computational simulation of growing citation networks: after ‘turning off’ CI, the systematic decline in CD reverses. (a) The

average CD5(t) calculated across 10 different computational realizations of (i) the standard CI model and (ii) the CI model with quenched


## reference list growth (gr = 0) for t ≥108. (b) Average rate of extraneous citation, Rk(t), showing that CD5(t) converges to 0 because the


denominator of the disruption index in Eq. (1) is unbounded as r(t) grows.



11

b

c

a

102

41

57

Marginal effect on ￼

Ln(41)

Ln(57)

[covariates held constant at mean values]

|CDp,5|

PNAS (print + online)

0.030

15000

0.010

Sample size

PNAS Plus (online only)

0.025

PDF,  P(￼

)

|CDp,5|

101

10000

PDF,  P(￼ )

rp

0.020

0.005

5000

100

12.6%

0.015

￼δ = −0.00093

0

0.010

0.000

10-1

0.005

10-2

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

-0.005

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0.000

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

Log of reference list length, ￼



ln rp


## Reference list length, ￼


rp

Absolute disruption index, ￼



|CDp,5|

FIG. 3:

Quasi-experimental test and validation of the CI hypothesis: counterfactual juxtaposition of research articles published in

PNAS versus PNAS Plus. (a) Frequency distribution of the absolute disruption index, |CDp,5|. (b) Frequency distribution of the number of


## references per paper, rp. See Fig. S3 for comparison of the two subsamples across a wider range of characteristics. Dashed vertical bars


indicate the subsample means. (c) For both subsamples, the decline in is fully attributable to the variation in rp such that the difference in

average reference list lengths accounts for the entire, albeit small, difference in average |CDp,5|.

Team-size NormCD trend, !

Standardized units:

Journal-year Std. Dev., !σ[CD]j,t

Nominal units of !CD

(relative to !

)

γk

0.08

Temporal CD trend, !

0.0005

(relative to !

)

γt

kp = 1

0.06!σ

0.09 !σ

0.04

tp = 1995

0.00

0.0000

-0.04

b

a

-0.08

2000

2005

2010

2015

-0.0005

5

10

15

20

25

Publication year, !

tp

Team size, !



kp

FIG. 4: Non-linear temporal and team-size trends in CD after controlling for CI. Marginal effects produced by multivariable regression

that control for rp and cp (CI), increasing team sizes (kp), and tendency for larger teams to produce longer papers with longer reference lists

(kp × t). (a) Results indicate that disruptive science has incrementally increased since 2006 – which is consistent with three independent re-

analyses reported in [10, 11, 13]. The magnitude of the effect size (0.06σ) is relatively small. (b) In contrast to [19], results indicate that large

teams (incrementally) disrupt and small teams (incrementally) develop science. The magnitude of the effect size (0.09σ) is inconsequential in

terms of team science policy guidance and team assembly strategy. Shown are factor variable point estimates with 95% confidence intervals;

Gray error bars are not statistically deviant from the baseline level indicated by the horizontal dashed line (p > 0.05). See Tables S3 & S4 for

the full list of model parameter estimates.



1

Supplemental Information: Figures S1-S4 and Tables S1-S4

Nature : 1960-2020

per year, !nt

# articles

2000

average = 1290

1000

a

1960

1980

2000

2020

0

b

500

Distribution of # refs. per research article, !Pt(rp)

100

50

10

5

1

1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

Publication year

FIG. S1:

Citation inflation affects journals of all sizes, even those with relatively small change in n(t). (a) The number of research

articles, nt, published by Nature tabulated over 5-year intervals from 1960 to 2020. Counts are based upon Clarivate Analytics Web of Science

Core Collection, using records classified as document type = “Article” and neglecting articles with rp = 0, which are likely misclassified

editorial comments and the like. (b) The frequency distribution Pt(rp) shows the distribution of the number of references per article, and

indicates that the increasing trend in Figure 1(d) is not attributable to outliers, but rather a systematic shift towards larger rp values.



2

a

b

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

101

102

103

104

105

106

101

102

103

104

105

106

80

￼gC = gn + gr = 0.051

Total citations produced per year

Citation inflation (CI) Model

60

CI Model: no CI after ￼T* = 108

Publications per year

￼

, ￼

n(t) C(t)

￼gr = 0.018

￼gr = 0

￼rp(t)

40

￼gn = 0.033

20

T* = 108

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0

c

d

0.4

12

Average rate of extraneous citation, ￼Rk(t)

10

0.3

8

Average ￼CD5(t)

0.2

6

4

0.1

2

T* = 108

T* = 108

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0.0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0

Model period (year), t

Model period (year), t

e

f

30

30

24

24

CW=10 = 0.99

CW=10 = 0.99

￼R2

￼R2

Rk(t)

Rk(t)

18

18

12

12

CW=5 = 0.96

CW=5 = 0.96

￼R2

￼R2

6

6

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

￼r(t)

￼r(t)

FIG. S2:

Computational simulation of growing citation networks elucidates roles of citation inflation underlying the decline of CD.

(a) Model system evolved over T = 150 periods (representing years). In each period, the number of new publications, n(t), and the reference

list length, r(t), are deterministically specified, however the particular papers that each new publication cites are stochastically generated

according to a network model that reproduces various structural and dynamic characteristics of real citation networks – see [2, 9] for more

model details. Most importantly, the growth of n(t) and r(t) are matched to the real growth rates, gn = 0.033 and gr = 0.018, estimated

using the Clarivate Analytics Web of Science citation network [2]. As such, the total number of citations produced per year, C(t) = n(t)r(t),

grows at compounded exponential rate of roughly 5% per year (gC = gn + gr = 0.051), which means that the total number of links in the

citation network doubles every ln(2)/gC = 13.6 years (or periods in our model). (b) In order to demonstrate how citation inflation deriving

from increasing r(t) affects the measurement of CD5(t), we constructed synthetic networks that share the same model parameters except

for gr: in scenario (a) we grow citation networks with fixed gr = 0.018 for the entire T = 150 periods (shown in orange); and in scenario

(b) we grow citation networks that start with gr = 0.018, but is abruptly changed to gr = 0 for t ≥T ∗= 108, which halts the growth

of reference lists, such that r(t|t ≥T ∗) = r(t = 108) = 34 (cyan). Scenario (b) thus explores a hypothetical publishing policy whereby

journals place a cap on reference list lengths. For example, Nature presently provides a soft policy cap – “As a guideline, articles typically

have no more than 50 references” (link). (c) Each curve shows the average CD5(t) calculated for a distinct synthetic network. To demonstrate

robustness across an ensemble of synthetic networks generated with uniform parameters, we show the average CD5(t) for each of 10 different

synthetic network realizations per scenario. Notably, each synthetic citation network shares common initial conditions, independent of the

scenario, and also share the same growth parameters for t ≤108. Hence, the differences in average CD5(t) for t < T ∗are attributable only to

stochastic dynamics, and this variation is relatively small across the 20 network realizations. Conversely, for t ≥T ∗the differences between

the scenarios is primarily attributable to citation inflation deriving from gr > 0 relative to the counterfactual scenario, gr = 0. Interestingly,

for all realizations featuring gr = 0, the average CD5(t) increases over time. (d) Rk(t) is the average rate of extraneous citations, which

appears to be an extensive quantity, growing proportional to the system size in scenario (a). However, in scenario (b), Rk(t) abruptly reverses

course, and appears to saturate in the long term. (e,f) The proportionality between Rk(t) and r(t) is one of the fundamental assumptions of our

critique, as it connects citation inflation deriving from r(t) to the systematic convergence of CDp →0. We validate this assumption using this

citation network growth model; we also validate this relationship empirically using a comprehensive dataset comprised of 30 million research

articles published over the period 1945-2012 – see [9]. To demonstrate the robustness of this relationship, we also calculated CDp,CW using

citation windows (CW) of 5 and 10 periods. The proportionality between Rk(t) and r(t) persists for both CW used, which demonstrates that

fixed citation windows do not address the fundamental secular growth bias associated with citation inflation.



3

PNAS Plus (online only)

a

PNAS (print + online)

b

100

102

CDF P(!

)

≥|CDp,5|

10-1

PDF P(!

)

CDp,5

101

10-2

100

10-3

10-1

10-4

10-2

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Absolute disruption index, !



|CDp,5|

Disruption index, !



CDp,5

c

d

0.030

0.10

0.025

PDF P(!

)

kp

Sample size

0.08

PDF P(!

)

rp

PDF P(!

)

cp,5

0.020

0.06

0.015

0.04

0.010

0.02

0.005

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

0.00

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

0.000


## Reference list length, !




rp

Coauthors, !



kp

e

f

15000

10-2

10-3

10000

10-4

5000

12.6%

10-5

0

100

101

102

103

Citations after 5 years, !



cp,5

FIG. S3:

Similarity of standard (print and online) PNAS and online-only PNAS Plus research articles. Each research article sample

includes all publications from the inaugural year of the online-only PNAS Plus option in 2011 [24] through 2015, since publications from this

final cohort need 5 years of post-publication data to calculate CDp,5. (a-e) Dashed vertical bars indicate the subsample means. (a) Frequency

distribution of CDp,5. (b) Frequency distribution of the absolute value, |CDp,5|. (c) Frequency distribution of the number of references per

paper (i.e., the ref. list length), rp, which is the variable featuring the most significant difference between the two samples. (d) Frequency

distribution of the number of coauthors, kp. (e) Frequency distribution of the number of citations received within a 5-year window, cp,5. (f)

Sample sizes, with PNAS Plus accounting for roughly 12.6% of the total sample size N = 18, 644 publications. All quantities analyzed were

obtained from the SciSciNet open data repository [30].



4

a

0.8

Frequency distribution,  P( ￼

)

CD

0.6

0.4

0.2

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

Disruption index, ￼CD

b

Residual effect size associated

with total variation in the

Frequency distribution,  P( ￼

)

CD

Frequency distribution,  P( Norm ￼

)

CDj,t

0.30

γt

temporal ￼ trend from

1995-2015

(0.00045 units)

0.25

￼



5 σ[CD]

￼



5 σ[CD]

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

-0.03 -0.02 -0.01

0.00

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.00

Disruption index, ￼CD

c

Residual effect size associated with

total variation in the

( 0.1 ￼ units)

γk

kp

σ

team-size ￼ trend from ￼ = 2 to 25

1.0

0.8

￼



5 σ[CD]j,t

￼



5 σ[CD]j,t

0.6

0.4

0.2

-4

-2

0

2

4

0.0

Normalized CD, in units of journal-year Std. Dev., ￼σ[CD]j,t

FIG. S4: Descriptive statistics: extremely concentrated distribution of CD. Publication data were obtained from the SciSciNet open data

repository [30], selecting journal articles published in the 21-year range 1995-2015, and further selecting only the articles with reference list

lengths in the range 10 ≤rp ≤200. This assures that we are not basing results upon editorials, comments, and other articles that do not

represent substantial research products, and avoids the susceptibility of CD to small data sample fluctuations, e.g. CD = Ni/Ni = 1 if

rp = 0 and cp > 0. We further select articles with 1 ≤cp,5 ≤1000 and 1 ≤kp ≤25, which reduce the sample size by just 0.26%. And

finally, we select articles with |NormCDp,5| ≤5, which reduces the sample by 0.66%. Hence, in combination the kp, cp and NormCDp,5

thresholds reduce the sample size by only 1%, and so the resulting analyses are based upon 99% of the data, which captures trends based upon

the overwhelmingly vast majority of research articles. (a) The frequency distribution P(CDp,5) is extremely leptokurtic. (b) Zooming in on

the ±5σ range of the CDp,5) distribution; 95.5% of the data are within ±2σ of the average CD value. The deviation between the vertical black

and magenta lines shows the relatively small amount of variation in CD attributable to the temporal trends shown in Fig. 4(a), which shows γt

from 1995-2015 (a total of 0.00045 units of CD, corresponding to 0.06σ in terms of the standard deviation of CD). (c) Frequency distribution

P(NormCDp,5) over the ±5σ range. The deviation between the vertical black and green lines shows the 0.09σ effect size attributable to the

team-size trends shown in Fig. 4(b). For visual comparison, the solid black curve represents a N(0, 1) normal distribution, showing that CD

is still leptokurtic after accounting for journal-year specific location and scale.



5

TABLE S1:

Quasi-experimental test of the CI hypothesis. Results of multivariate linear regression juxtaposing research published in

PNAS (print and online) versus PNAS Plus (online-only). Regression implemented using the same model specification indicated by Eqn. (2).

Below each coefficient estimate is the standard error shown in parentheses. The first four columns show partial models, and the fifth shows the

full multivariate model. The sixth column shows the results of the full model with DP NAS+ substituting for ln rp, such that the coefficient

explaining the differences in |CDp,5| attributable to the difference in means between the two samples is δ = −0.000947, which is precisely

the difference indicated by the interaction model (6) and the corresponding marginal effects shown in Fig. 2.

Dependent variable

|CDp,5|

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(Full model)

PNAS Plus (indicator), DP NAS+ -0.000790∗∗

δ = -0.000947∗∗∗

-0.00154

(0.000117)

(0.0000682)

(0.00129)


## Reference list length, ln rp


-0.00159∗∗

-0.00374∗∗

-0.00392∗∗

(0.000344)

(0.000526)

(0.000567)

DP NAS+ × ln rp

0.00106

(0.000499)

Team size, ln kp

0.000807∗∗

-0.0000615

-0.000303∗∗

-0.0000344

(0.0000975)

(0.0000380)

(0.0000573)

(0.0000512)

DP NAS+ × ln kp

-0.000350

(0.000203)

Citation impact, ln cp,5

0.00234∗∗∗0.00284∗∗∗

0.00243∗∗∗

0.00290∗∗∗

(0.000213) (0.000268)

(0.000221)

(0.000267)

DP NAS+ × ln cp,5

-0.000474

(0.000228)

Constant

0.00419∗∗∗

0.00996∗∗

0.00270∗∗∗-0.00449∗∗

0.00755∗∗

-0.00417∗∗

0.00795∗∗

(0.0000146) (0.00127)

(0.000169) (0.000782)

(0.00101)

(0.000749)

(0.000228)

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

18,644

18,644

18,644

18,644

18,644

18,644

18,644

adj. R2

0.002

0.009

0.008

0.118

0.165

0.122

0.165

p-values in parentheses

∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001

TABLE S2: Robustness check using a comprehensive data sample comprised of 6.9 million journal articles from 2011-2015. Results

of multivariate linear regression implemented in STATA 13 for dependent variable |CDp,5|, controlling for rp and secular growth by way of

yearly fixed-effects, as specified in Eqn. (2). Publication data were obtained from the SciSciNet open data repository [30], selecting journal

articles published in the 5-year range 2011-2015, with reference list lengths in the range 10 ≤rp ≤200, with team sizes in the range

1 ≤kp ≤25, and citation count within 5 years of publication in the range 1 ≤cp,5 ≤1000. Covariates are included following a logarithmic

transform. Shown below each coefficient estimate is the standard error (in parentheses). The first three columns show partial models, and the

fourth shows the full multivariate model; column model numbers coincide with those in Table S1.

Dependent variable

|CDp,5|

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)


## Reference list length, ln rp -0.00149∗∗∗


-0.00287∗∗∗

(0.0000557)

(0.000120)

Team size, ln kp

0.000256∗∗

-0.000254∗∗∗

(0.0000373)

(0.00000420)

Citation impact, ln cp,5

0.00116∗∗∗

0.00176∗∗∗

(0.0000731) (0.0000944)

Constant

0.00756∗∗∗

0.00209∗∗∗

-0.000138

0.00874∗∗∗

(0.000191) (0.0000501) (0.000162)

(0.000206)

Year FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

6,897,363

6,897,363

6,897,363

6,897,363

adj. R2

0.021

0.001

0.052

0.119

Standard errors in parentheses

∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001



6

TABLE S3: Non-linear cross-temporal trends in CD shows increasing disruptiveness since 2011 relative to 1995. Data sample are 7.8

million articles from the top 1000 most productive journals over the period 1995-2015. Results of multivariate linear regression implemented in

STATA 13 for CDp,5 based upon the model specification in Eqn. (4), which incorporates journal-level fixed-effects to control for unobserved

time-independent factors, such as disciplinary orientation. Publication data were obtained from the SciSciNet open data repository [30], and

are restricted to articles with reference list lengths in the range 10 ≤rp ≤200, with team sizes in the range 1 ≤kp ≤25, and citation count

within 5 years of publication in the range 1 ≤cp,5 ≤1000. Shown below each coefficient estimate is the standard error (in parentheses). The

baseline group for the year factor variable γt is 1995.

Dependent variable

CDp,5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)


## Reference list length, ln rp


-0.00331∗∗∗

-0.00332∗∗∗

(0.000495)

(0.000434)

(ln rp)2

0.000504∗∗∗

0.000654∗∗∗

(0.0000663)

(0.0000576)

Citation impact, ln cp,5

-0.000154∗∗

-0.000154∗

(0.0000570)

(0.0000611)

(ln cp,5)2

-0.000299∗∗∗

-0.000331∗∗∗

(0.0000136)

(0.0000147)

Team size, ln kp

-0.0543∗∗∗

-0.0471∗∗∗

(0.00729)

(0.00668)

(ln kp)2

0.0000530

0.000151∗∗∗

(0.0000276)

(0.0000222)

time-dependent team-size correction, ln kp × t

0.0000267∗∗∗0.0000232∗∗∗

(0.00000363) (0.00000333)

γt=1995

0

0

0

0

1996

0.0000197

0.0000284

0.00000701

0.00000495

(0.0000655)

(0.0000673)

(0.0000664)

(0.0000685)

1997

-0.0000515

0.0000525

-0.0000806

-0.00000817

(0.0000620)

(0.0000616)

(0.0000641)

(0.0000635)

1998

-0.000187∗∗

-0.0000103

-0.000237∗∗∗

-0.000108

(0.0000602)

(0.0000596)

(0.0000622)

(0.0000618)

1999

-0.000250∗∗∗

0.0000107

-0.000323∗∗∗

-0.000125∗

(0.0000601)

(0.0000606)

(0.0000634)

(0.0000635)

2000

-0.000201∗∗

0.000133∗

-0.000298∗∗∗

-0.0000464

(0.0000678)

(0.0000674)

(0.0000695)

(0.0000689)

2001

-0.000319∗∗∗

0.0000606

-0.000442∗∗∗

-0.000151∗

(0.0000681)

(0.0000682)

(0.0000735)

(0.0000723)

2002

-0.000397∗∗∗

0.0000756

-0.000544∗∗∗

-0.000178∗

(0.0000717)

(0.0000731)

(0.0000793)

(0.0000775)

2003

-0.000429∗∗∗

0.000110

-0.000600∗∗∗

-0.000184∗

(0.0000727)

(0.0000758)

(0.0000840)

(0.0000811)

2004

-0.000422∗∗∗

0.000176∗

-0.000613∗∗∗

-0.000167

(0.0000767)

(0.0000824)

(0.0000931)

(0.0000890)

2005

-0.000402∗∗∗

0.000214∗

-0.000623∗∗∗

-0.000179

(0.0000817)

(0.0000872)

(0.000103)

(0.0000950)

2006

-0.000416∗∗∗

0.000246∗∗

-0.000662∗∗∗

-0.000203∗

(0.0000807)

(0.0000887)

(0.000106)

(0.0000974)

2007

-0.000382∗∗∗0.000332∗∗∗-0.000653∗∗∗

-0.000173

(0.0000848)

(0.0000932)

(0.000114)

(0.000103)

2008

-0.000349∗∗∗0.000408∗∗∗-0.000649∗∗∗

-0.000164

(0.0000862)

(0.0000982)

(0.000124)

(0.000109)

2009

-0.000299∗∗∗0.000523∗∗∗-0.000624∗∗∗

-0.000111

(0.0000857)

(0.000102)

(0.000129)

(0.000113)

2010

-0.000174∗

0.000685∗∗∗-0.000524∗∗∗

-0.0000127

(0.0000869)

(0.000104)

(0.000135)

(0.000117)

2011

-0.00000670 0.000826∗∗∗

-0.000385∗∗

0.0000594

(0.0000870)

(0.000108)

(0.000142)

(0.000121)

2012

0.000135

0.000974∗∗∗

-0.000270

0.000137

(0.0000877)

(0.000110)

(0.000147)

(0.000125)

2013

0.000261∗∗

0.00108∗∗∗

-0.000174

0.000167

(0.0000886)

(0.000111)

(0.000152)

(0.000127)

2014

0.000437∗∗∗

0.00126∗∗∗

-0.0000288

0.000282∗

(0.0000896)

(0.000113)

(0.000158)

(0.000131)

2015

0.000631∗∗∗

0.00149∗∗∗

0.000136

0.000445∗∗

(0.0000906)

(0.000117)

(0.000165)

(0.000137)

Constant

0.00271∗∗

-0.000608∗∗∗-0.00153∗∗∗

0.00399∗∗∗

(0.000933)

(0.0000809)

(0.000136)

(0.000810)

N

7,768,207

7,768,207

7,768,207

7,768,207

adj. R2

0.003

0.048

0.003

0.055

Standard errors in parentheses

∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001



7

TABLE S4:

Non-linear dependence of CD on team size, shows increasing disruptiveness of teams with kp ≥8 coauthors. Data

sample are 7.8 million articles from the top 1000 most productive journals over the period 1995-2015. Results of multivariate linear regression

implemented in STATA 13 for the journal-year normalized disruption index NormCDp,5, based upon the model specification in Eqn. (5),

which incorporates year fixed-effects to control for unobserved shocks. Since NormCDp,5 is a standardized metric, coefficients correspond to

effect sizes measured in units of journal-year standard deviations of CDp,5,t,j. Publication data were obtained from the SciSciNet open data

repository [30], and are restricted to articles with reference list lengths in the range 10 ≤rp ≤200, with team sizes in the range 1 ≤kp ≤25,

and citation count within 5 years of publication in the range 1 ≤cp,5 ≤1000. Shown below each coefficient estimate is the standard error (in

parentheses). The baseline group for the team size factor variable γk are solo-authored publications (kp = 1).

Dependent variable

NormCDp,5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)


## Reference list length, ln rp -0.198∗∗∗


-0.142∗∗∗

(0.0279)

(0.0334)

(ln rp)2

0.0341∗∗∗

0.0451∗∗∗

(0.00400)

(0.00446)

Citation impact, ln cp,5

0.00991

-0.0136∗∗∗

(0.00608)

(0.00354)

(ln cp,5)2

-0.0337∗∗∗

-0.0354∗∗∗

(0.00198)

(0.00170)

γkp=1

0

0

2

-0.0653∗∗∗-0.0369∗∗∗

(0.00260)

(0.00318)

3

-0.0818∗∗∗-0.0423∗∗∗

(0.00268)

(0.00337)

4

-0.0868∗∗∗-0.0351∗∗∗

(0.00239)

(0.00316)

5

-0.0895∗∗∗-0.0260∗∗∗

(0.00291)

(0.00340)

6

-0.0929∗∗∗-0.0170∗∗∗

(0.00301)

(0.00327)

7

-0.0933∗∗∗

-0.00554

(0.00364)

(0.00375)

8

-0.0989∗∗∗

0.00229

(0.00427)

(0.00390)

9

-0.108∗∗∗

0.00677

(0.00535)

(0.00481)

10

-0.116∗∗∗

0.0138∗∗

(0.00587)

(0.00479)

11

-0.121∗∗∗

0.0252∗∗∗

(0.00531)

(0.00503)

12

-0.132∗∗∗

0.0331∗∗∗

(0.00814)

(0.00625)

13

-0.149∗∗∗

0.0285∗∗∗

(0.00762)

(0.00575)

14

-0.158∗∗∗

0.0338∗∗∗

(0.00810)

(0.00724)

15

-0.171∗∗∗

0.0369∗∗∗

(0.00914)

(0.00813)

16

-0.187∗∗∗

0.0372∗∗∗

(0.0100)

(0.00888)

17

-0.208∗∗∗

0.0305∗∗

(0.00998)

(0.0100)

18

-0.210∗∗∗

0.0394∗∗

(0.00969)

(0.0119)

19

-0.223∗∗∗

0.0415∗

(0.0132)

(0.0150)

20

-0.247∗∗∗

0.0444∗∗

(0.0135)

(0.0135)

21

-0.244∗∗∗

0.0363

(0.0167)

(0.0189)

22

-0.238∗∗∗

0.0462∗∗

(0.0151)

(0.0157)

23

-0.260∗∗∗

0.0405∗

(0.0125)

(0.0167)

24

-0.277∗∗∗

0.0295

(0.0153)

(0.0199)

25

-0.256∗∗∗

0.0527∗

(0.0203)

(0.0187)

Constant

0.290∗∗∗

0.248∗∗∗

0.106∗∗∗

0.290∗∗∗

(0.0476)

(0.00256)

(0.00291)

(0.0604)

N

7,768,207 7,768,207 7,768,207 7,768,207

adj. R2

0.001

0.055

0.001

0.068

Standard errors in parentheses

∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001