Hunting for Room Temperature Superconductors

Huiqian Luo1﹡

1Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese

Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

﹡Correspondence: hqluo@iphy.ac.cn

Superconductivity is the first discovered macroscopic quantum phenomenon since 1911.

Superconductors are defined as the materials host both zero resistance and full diamagnetism

(Meissner effect) states below the critical temperature (Tc) of a second order thermodynamic phase

transition. In microscopic view, superconducting state is a condensation of coherent electron pairs

(Cooper pairs) protected by finite energy gaps near the Fermi levels. Therefore, superconductors

can be used as the hosts of strong electric current and high magnetic field, as well as quantum

devices and chips, to break the limits of electromagnetic and quantum applications in traditional

materials [1].



To date, thousands of superconductors have been discovered in many chemical forms such as

pure elements, alloys, intermetallic compounds, heavy fermions, hydrides, cuprates, pnictides,

nickelates, carbides even organic materials, etc (Fig.1). However, the superconducting applications

are limited within several materials such as Nb, Nb-Ti, Nb3Sn, Nb3Al, MgB2, ReBa2Cu3O7-δ,

Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10+δ, Ba1-xKxFe2As2, etc. None of them can fully replace the

traditional cables or magnets due to their expensive costs. To search a useful superconductor, one

must have high critical temperature, high upper critical field (Hc2) and high critical current density

(Jc), nevertheless, it is better to show chemical stability, non-toxicity, flexibility, enough mechanical

strength, low price, and easy production. Taking the extensively used Nb-Ti wire as an example,

due to the limitation of Tc < 10 K and Hc2 < 10 T, the Nb-Ti based magnets can be only used by

cooling in liquid helium and under a medium field. Although the highest record of Tc under ambient

pressure is realized in HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+δ system, this compound is toxic, sensitive in air and hard to

synthesis. The iron-based superconductors open a new avenue for high field applications below 55

K, if its Jc can be further improved in comparison with cuprates. So far, the REBCO (ReBa2Cu3O7-

δ) tapes and Bi2212 (Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ) wires are the most promising superconducting materials for

the applications under liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K), but the complex production technology


## results in high prices due to their intrinsic disadvantages on mechanical strength, extreme anisotropy


of Hc2, weak pinning of magnetic flux and rich flux dynamics in the mixed state[2].



For decades, scientists desire to hunt for room temperature superconductors (RTS), whose Tc

are above the room temperature T=300 K. RTS retain the last hope of massive superconducting

applications under ambient conditions, even though the Jc and Hc2 may be not as expected. In fact,

there are dozens of RTS reported in the last 50 years, but none of these results can be reproduced by

other groups, thus they are known as “Unidentified Superconducting Objects” (USO). We must

emphasis that the judgement of a superconductor is very strict on absolute zero resistance and near

100% diamagnetism below Tc and under a low field. More importantly, the superconducting

transitions is driven by the condensation of Cooper pairs, which means the entropy should be



reduced accompanying by a jump of electron heat capacity. While all three criteria may not establish

simultaneously, the drop down of resistivity, suppression of transitions under magnetic field, weak

diamagnetism (< 1% volume) and anomaly in heat capacity cannot be alone taken as the evidence

of superconductivity. Indeed, there are so many USO or RTS exhibiting spurious signatures such as

a resistance transition induced by density waves, a diamagnetic signal due to contaminations, an

anomaly in heat capacity induced by a weak magnetic transition, etc[3]. In recent years, the hunting

for RTS even hotter than any time in the history of condensed matter physics. Some cases turn out

to be scandals, but the faith of RTS persists. In below, we address some possible roadmaps for RTS.



Metal hydrides under extreme high pressure. The metallic hydrogen is one of the predicted

RTS over 80 years ago. According to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, the electron

pairs form by exchanging energies from phonon excitations and condense coherently. The hydrogen,

as the lightest element in the universe, can form a metallic state under extreme high pressure, to

support the strongest chemical bonding and high density of states on the Fermi surface.

Unfortunately, the synthesis pressure of metallic hydrogen is close to 500 GPa, almost the upper

limited hydrostatic pressure of diamond. Several reports on metallic hydrogen were published, but

questions are more than evidences. Scientists turn to search superconductivity in hydrides, which

may not require such pressure limit. This idea was first realized in H3S in 2015, then enormous

binary hydrides are predicted and discovered, some of them show a possible superconducting

transition above 200 K. Since hydrogen can easily bond with most of the elements in the periodic

table in many forms, the hydrides give an endless gold mine for the hunting of RTS. Now, with data-

driven strategy, people are searching for RTS in multinary hydrides even at ambient pressure [4].



Unconventional superconductivity with pairing glues other than phonons. In 1960s, G. M.

Eliashberg, W. L. McMillan and P. W. Anderson predicted that the phonon-mediated Cooper pairs

cannot form superconductivity above 40 K at ambient pressure, which is called as the McMillan

limit. However, the discovery of high-Tc superconductivity in cuprates breaks this limit in 1980s, so

do the iron-based superconductors in 2008. Therefore, the cuprates and iron-based superconductors

are categorized as unconventional superconductors, along with the heavy fermion superconductors,

some Cr-based and Mn-based superconductors, and the newly discovered nickelates (Fig.1) [5].

Although the microscopic mechanism of unconventional superconductivity has not been well

understood yet, more and more evidences suggest that the pairing glue of Cooper pairs is not pure

phonon excitations. Some other candidates, such as magnetic fluctuations, polarons and plasmons

are proposed, manifested by various scaling laws. With help from these new paring glues together

with phonons, higher Tc superconductivity may be discovered in future.



Two-dimensional interface superconductivity. Two-dimensional (2D) materials usually

exhibit strong quantum fluctuations, which could play important roles in interface superconductivity.

The classical example is LaAlO3/SrTiO3, while both of them are insulators, but the interface shows

a superconductivity below Tc =0.2 K. The bulk FeSe shows a superconductivity below Tc =9 K,

surprisingly Tc in the interface between the single layer FeSe and SrTiO3 (or BaTiO3, LaFeO3) is

raised up to 65 K even 80 K. By choosing the right geometry in (Bi,Sb)2Te3/FeTe and EuO/KTaO3

system, interface superconductivity emerges, too[2]. Following this idea, RTS is possible in

combinations of interfaces.



Tunable superconductivity by charge carriers. The high-Tc superconductivity can be tuned

by chemical dopings, which probably introduce additional charge carriers or local crystalline

distortion. This becomes a typical method to tune the conductivity in many 2D materials such as the

twisted bilayer graphene. After further liquid or solid ionic gating, the existing superconductivity in

low dimensional materials may be improved above 300 K.



Nano-superconductors designed by atomic engineering. Inspiring by the nano materials, we

can design nano-superconductors by atomic engineering in many ways: different sandwich

structures of 2D materials, nanotubes in 2D sheets, atomic clusters on the surfaces, 1D nanotubes

with multiply walls, etc. This idea was also proposed in organic systems, theorists believed the

complex nano-engineering may generate superconductivity even above 1000 K [2].



Unexpected superconductors predicted by Artificial Intelligence (AI). Although there is no

theoretical limitation on Tc of unconventional superconductors, we do not have any theory to predict

the RTS, either. This gives chances for AI hunting for RTS. By learning from the abundant data of

existing superconductors and calculating the physical properties of unknow materials, AI could find

unexpected matches without any theory, including the RTS [2].



Superconductivity in highly disordered materials. So far, superconductivity mostly emerges

in crystalline solids. However, there are also some reports on the superconducting quasicrystals,

high entropy alloys, even non-crystalline materials. In these materials, the long-range crystalline

symmetry is broken, but Cooper pairs may survive in short range. Again, we do not have theories

to describe the superconductivity in such disordered systems, and the possibility of RTS exists.



Superconductivity in organic-inorganic hybrid materials. If we extend our scope to

organic-inorganic hybrid materials, there will be more candidates for RTS. Taking the organic ion

intercalated FeSe superconductors (CTA)xFeSe and (TBA)xFeSe for examples, their Tc reaches

about 43 K, much higher than the bulk FeSe [2].



Superconductors from outer space. It is argued that metallic hydrogen may exist in the inner

space of Jupiter due to the high pressure over 400 GPa. As we known, the solar system forms at

billions years ago under extremely hot environment, high pressure and strong radiations. In the early

ages, asteroid may contain superconducting compounds which cannot be artificially synthesized [2].

Superconductivity in meteorite was confirmed several years ago, but the Tc is very low.



Superconductivity with charge condensations other than electrons. Instead, some

astronomers proposed radical ideas about the neutron star, where its magnetic pulses probably

originate from the flux excitations of superconducting state of protons. Such proton superconductors

may host a Tc up to 10 billion K, but it is impossible to testify this picture [2]. However, in some

materials, the charge carriers may not electrons but other particles or quasiparticles, the high velocity

and near massless nature of them may induce superconductivity near 300 K.



The RTS is believed as a jewel in the crown of condensed matter physics, but we should be



very cautious and keep claim for the hunting of RTS. Even the RTS is discovered, it may be useless

in high power electricity transport or high field applications for the possible low Jc and Hc2. No

matter what the future of RTS, the pursuing for RTS requires the spirit of exploration, endeavor and

curiosity in science, it will certainly change our world and knowledge forever.

Figure 1. The discovery of typical superconductors and their critical temperature.




## REFERENCES


1.

Schrieffer, J. R., Brooks, J. S., (2007). Handbook of High-Temperature Superconductivity. Springer.

2.

Luo, H. Q., (2022). The Ages of Superconductivity (in Chinese). Tsinghua University Press.

3.

Pickett, W. E., (2023). Room temperature superconductivity: The roles of theory and materials design. Rev.

Mod. Phys. 95, 021001

4.

Zhong X., Tse, J. S., Hemley, R. J., and Liu, H., (2022). Theory-directed discovery of high-temperature



superconductivity in clathrate hydrides at high pressure. The Innovation 3(2), 100226.

5.

Qin,Q., Wang, J. and Yang,Y. -f., (2024). Frustrated superconductivity and intrinsic reduction of Tc in trilayer

nickelate. The Innovation Materials 2, 100102.


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant Nos.

2023YFA1406100 and 2018YFA0704200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.

11822411, 11874057 and 11961160699), the Strategic Priority Research Program (B) of the CAS (Grant No.

XDB25000000) and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS (Grant No. Y202001).

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The author declares no competing interests.