June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

arXiv:2512.16943v4  [physics.soc-ph]  3 Jun 2026

Forsaking your own: unveiling the delayed recognition of

Garﬁeld’s work on the “delayed recognition” phenomenon

Tariq Ahmad MIR1,a,b and Marcel AUSLOOS3,4,5,6,c,d,e∗

1Nuclear Research Laboratory, Astrophysical Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research

Centre, Srinagar-190 006, Jammu and Kashmir, India.

a e-mail address: taarik.mir@gmail.com

b e-mail address: tamir@barc.gov.in

3 GRAPES†

rue de la Belle Jardini`ere 483, B-4031, Angleur, Li`ege, Belgium

ce-mail address: marcel.ausloos@uliege.be

4 School of Business, University of Leicester,

Brookﬁeld, Leicester, LE2 1RQ, UK

d e-mail address: ma683@leicester.ac.uk

5 Universitatea Babes,-Bolyai,

Str. Mihail Kog˘alniceanu nr. 1, 400084, Cluj-Napoca, Romania

6 Department of Statistics and Econometrics,

Bucharest University of Economic Studies, 15-17 Dorobanti Avenue,

District 1, 010552, Bucharest, Romania,

e e-mail address: marcel.ausloos@ase.ro


## Abstract


Delayed recognition (DR) implies that the full scholarly potential of certain scien-

tiﬁc papers is recognized belatedly many years after their publication. Such papers

are initially barely cited (sleep), and then suddenly, sometime in the future, their

citation numbers burst (are awakened). After van Raan (2004a) called them “Sleep-

ing Beauties” the DR phenomenon has drawn considerable attention. However, long

before van Raan (2004a) Garﬁeld studied the phenomenon in a series of articles from

1970 up to year 2004. In the present study we ask the pertinent question; Has the

phenomenon of DR itself suﬀered the delayed recognition? In search of an answer we

study the citation history of the Garﬁeld (1980a) paper in which Garﬁeld addressed

DR directly for the ﬁrst time. We ﬁnd that the paper hardly received the attention

beﬁtting the Garﬁeld’s stature as an information scientist. Speciﬁcally, the paper

received a meager of 10 citations up to the publication year of van Raan (2004a)

and was then, in 2007, feebly awakened from its deep sleep of twenty-eight years

∗Deceased

†Group of Researchers for Applications of Physics in Economy and Sociology

1



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

2

receiving 20 citations in next four years; up to 2010. Being the undisputed giant

of information science that even Garﬁeld’s paper on DR can suﬀer DR is hardly

anticipated.

Keywords

Eugene Garﬁeld; Delayed recognition; Sleeping beauty


## 1. Introduction


Certain scientiﬁc papers, amongst the vast number of them published, are initially

looked down. The issue has been much delved upon by sociologists of science. Barber

(1961) provides examples of new scientiﬁc ideas resisted by scientists themselves

on account of being against the science in vogue, professional specialization and

standing of the discoverers in the social system of science. Merton (1963) discusses

the resistance to the systematic study of multiples discoveries, again by scientists

themselves, highlighting how the scientist of higher professional standing prevails

when there are priority disputes; who was the ﬁrst to make the discovery under

contest, whereas lesser known ones get pushed over. Cole (1970) found that while it

is the quality of the paper that determines its reception the reputation of the author,

based on his previous work, does aﬀect its acceptance. Stent (1972), discussing the

discovery of hereditary nature of DNA, attributes the lack of its appreciation, and

of scientiﬁc discoveries in general, to its prematurity in that it can’t be logically

incorporated into the larger cannon of knowledge reasons for which, in this speciﬁc

case, were pointed out to be purely technical by Wyatt (1975).

Those studies by sociologists, e.g., Barber (1961) and Merton (1970) are quali-

tative, except somewhat for Cole (1970), whereas these by scientists, Stent (1972)

and Wyatt (1975), are related to the speciﬁc examples of the ignored papers from

their own specialization. The quantitative analysis of the broader phenomenon was

ﬁrst taken up by Garﬁeld aided by his unique position of being the owner of the

“Science Citation Index” (SCI) the only citation database available then. Garﬁeld

(1970), a two page note in Current Contents (CC) magazine, debunked the alleged

lack of acknowledgement of the importance of Mendel’s seminal work on genetics.

Notice that the latter was then purported to be a classic case of a work, having gone

unnoticed; the true worth was realized after a delay of more than four decades.

Drawing on the work of sociologists and scientists, we alluded to above, Garﬁeld

(1980a, 1980b) revisited the phenomenon, a decade after Garﬁeld (1970), using

the term DR for the ﬁrst timea. Garﬁeld (1980b, 1980c) justiﬁed the raison d’ˆetre

of SCI, against criticism exuding conﬁdence that its availability will aid not only

in identifying useful work but would also prevent their unintentional neglect and

aGarﬁeld (1970) used the term “ignore” for failure to foresee the importance of such papers.

Garﬁeld (1970) and Cole (1970), published their view in the same year, but do not cite each other

despite both using SCI in their analysis.



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

3

duplication. Furthermore, Garﬁeld (1989a) through quantitative analysis of citation

histories contained in SCI unraveled the scientiﬁc works which had been ignored

initially for a considerable period of time for reasons that sociologists of science

had much discussed. Interestingly, Garﬁeld actively engaged with the readers of the

CC calling upon them to report any such works, thereafter publishing their letters

in the magazine, and then analyzing SCI data to conﬁrm that the reported works

have indeed suﬀered DR (Garﬁeld, 1989c, 1989d). Garﬁeld (1992) used the citation


## data of their work to predict the future Nobel prize winners and conﬁrmed the


DR, or not, of the winning work of those who have already been awarded the prize

(Garﬁeld, 1985a, 1986b).

After vigorously pursuing it for over two decades Garﬁeld grew skeptical of DR

phenomenon (Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld, 2004). Nevertheless, the subject bounced back to

prominence in year 2004 itself after van Raan (2004a) rechristened papers having

suﬀered DR as ”Sleeping Beauties” (SBs). By analogy with the stories by Perrault

(1697) and by the Grimm brothers (1812) such a paper whose citation triggers

the resurgence of a SB has its “prince”. The citation accumulation of SB papers is

peculiar in that they are initially only occasionally cited, or not cited at all, for a long

time (sleeping time) after their publication and some time in the future, following a

citation by the ”prince”, their citations start increasing rapidly (awakening time).

This citation trajectory is in stark contrast to that of a typical scientiﬁc paper whose

citations peak with in the ﬁrst few years of its publication (Gl¨anzel & Schoepﬂin,

1995; Gl¨anzel et al., 2003; Costas et al., 2010) and then continuously decline over

the years and ﬁnally stop accumulating.

Following van Raan (2004a) the study of SBs, or DR phenomenon as Garﬁeld

called it, has attracted much attention. Scientometric studies among others include

unearthing of SBs and of their respective princes through scanning of large citation


## databases (Gl¨anzel et al., 2003; van Raan, 2004a; Braun et al., 2010; Ke et al., 2015),


developing diﬀerent criteria and quantitative methods for their unearthing (Winnink

et al, 2019; Miura et al., 2021), identifying diﬀerent types of SBs (Li & Ye, 2012;

van Raan, 2015), unraveling the reasons of their DR and also for their awakening

(van Dalen & Henkens, 2005; Wang et al., 2012; Li & Shi, 2016; Ye & Bornmann,

2017), strategies for preventing DR of important work in future (Jiang et al., 2024),

using data other than citation; altmetrics, for their identiﬁcation (Hou & Zhang,


## 2023) and pointing out the extreme cases of those SBs which the analysis of large



## databases fail to capture (Van Calster, 2012; Mir & Ausloos, 2018). Sometimes, the



## discussion pertains to very speciﬁc ﬁelds (Fazelli-Varzaneh et al., 2021).


Unlike van Raan (2004a) Garﬁeld’s work on DR hardly elicited any interest

from the wider scientiﬁc community, - a response unanticipated given his acclaimed

stature as an information scientist. Intriguingly the lone paper, amongst his work

on DR, featuring in the list of his 50 most cited papers is Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004)

when they expressed skepticism of the phenomenon (Panday & Gupta, 2021). De-

spite Garﬁeld’s pursuance of more than two decades, DR is not counted amongst in-



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

4

spirations that inﬂuenced his scientiﬁc work (Bornmann et al., 2018). Furthermore,

neither are any of his articles on the phenomenon included amongst his 10 most

under-cited yet inﬂuential articles (Rousseau & Hu, 2018) nor are they amongst

his most read publications (Thelwall, 2017). On the other hand, Chen (2018) found

that citations to Garﬁeld (1980a) have bursted upto year 1985; - which however we

reveal is purely due to self-citations, six of them, in this period.

Therefore, in the present study, we ask the pertinent question: Has the Garﬁeld’s

work on DR been a victim of DR itself?, i.e., an undeserving fate which he tried to

bring to the attention of a wide scientiﬁc community. Furthermore, we wonder if the

experts in the ﬁeld, including Garﬁeld himself, have forgotten their own backyard

while looking for the dormitory of SBs in other areas of knowledge. In search for

an answer we study Garﬁeld’s entire body of work on DR phenomenon published

over the years. Speciﬁcally we analyze the citation history of Garﬁeld (1980a) paper

in which Garﬁeld used the term DR for the ﬁrst time to describe the publications

whose true potential is belatedly recognized.

In order to do so, ﬁrst we test the citations received by this 1980a paper against

Garﬁeld’s own criteria (Garﬁeld 1989a, 1990a) for identifying a paper as a case

of DR. Next, we apply the criteria recently prescribed by van Raan (2004a) to

check if Garﬁeld (1980a) paper is a SB. We also calculate the beauty coeﬃcient and

awakening time for this SB as per the procedure of Ke et al. (2015).

Surprisingly, we reveal that Garﬁeld (1980a) paper has struggled for its entire

citation life before achieving the 10-fold of the citations accumulated in the ﬁrst

decade of its publication. Furthermore, the maximum number of citations for any

given year was never crossing the count of one for an incredible 23 years up to year


## 2002. Thus, we ﬁnd that the paper was in a state of deep sleep for a period of 28


years up to 2007. Furthermore, without citing Garﬁeld (1980a) van Raan (2004a)

is a prince who had just a glimpse of its SB, thereby leading only to its ”feeble

awakening”.


## 2. Data


Obtaining citations data for Garﬁeld’s work is a challenge given that most of it

appeared in CC magazine, - his self-owned and self-edited publication (Bornmann

et al., 2018). Bereft of peer review process, the benchmark of scholarly literature

and basis for its indexing, the metadata corresponding to Garﬁeld’s work are not

correctly reported by Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus, i.e., the two main biblio-

metric databases (Jasco, 2018). Therefore, neither Scopus nor WoS can be trusted,

the latter ironically, for the oeuvre of its own founder (Hu & Rousseau, 2017). Indeed

Jasco (2010) found that WoS does not provide correct information on the bibliogra-

phy and citations received for Garﬁeld’s contributions in the CC. Pertinently, Jasco

(2010) revealed how WoS wrongly attributed all the citations received by the 52

articles in 1980 issue of CC to a single paper, which was an editorial about the new

building of the Institute for Scientiﬁc Information. Notice that the issue contains



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

5

the paper Garﬁeld (1980a) the number of citations to which is the subject matter

of present investigation.

The limitations of Google Scholar (GS) (Jasco, 2005) and the problematic cover-

age of Garﬁeld’s oeuvre by the Scopus and WoS implies that none of the three cita-

tion databases can be used in isolation. Therefore, to build a comprehensive dataset

of papers citing Garﬁeld (1980a) we combine the data from the three databases.

Each database was searched for the title of Garﬁeld (1980a) paper on September

15, 2025. The overall citation count to the paper from Scopus, WoS and GS re-

spectively turned out to be 45, 93 and 205. The smaller number of yearly citations

enabled us to inspect each of the search results so that we keep at bay any duplicate

or incorrect citations. The later concern is particularly true for GS data which we

corrected for one duplicate self-citation, Garﬁeld & Welljams-Dorof (1992), for year

1992 and for two wrongly attributed self-citations, Garﬁeld (1990a), for 1998. Next

to ensure that none of the citing papers is counted multiple times as a citation

for any given year we compared the yearly search results of the three databases.

For example, for 2007 there respectively are one, two and three citations to Garﬁeld

(1980a) in WoS, GS and Scopus. However, one citing paper, Gl¨anzel (2007), is listed

in, is common to, all the three datasets so we count it only once whereas another

one, Simkin & Roychowdhury (2007), is found in GS and Scopus but not in WoS

and therefore it is again counted once only. On the other hand, Levitt & Thelwall

(2007) is listed in Scopus only. So for year 2007 though there are a total of six

citations listed in the three databases only three of them are unique citations. In

this way for every year we identiﬁed unique citations to Garﬁeld (1980a). We found

ﬁfteen such citations from Scopus and seven from WoS not listed in GS. From the

three databases we build a dataset of 214 unique papers citing Garﬁeld (1980a).

Knowing that only robust data can lead to reliable conclusions we have to ensure

that the incomplete coverage of Garﬁeld’s oeuvre by three databases does not pol-

lute our analysis. Admittedly when it comes to looking for information on Garﬁeld

nothing can be more authentic than that provided by Garﬁeld himself. The Garﬁeld

Library of the University of Pennsylvania (https://garﬁeld.library.upenn.edu/) is an

exhaustive source of information on the biographical material, academic achieve-

ments and investments of Garﬁeld. To crosscheck our search results from GS, WoS

and Scopus, we turned to this eponymous library. The database has customized

search box powered by Google on its home page. A search dated September 26,

2025, for the title of Garﬁeld (1980a), as we had done on the three databases,

displayed 286 results.

We downloaded the PDF’s of search results and inspected them all, one by one,

to ﬁnd out which ones actually cite the Garﬁeld (1980a) paper. It was observed that

in many of his publications Garﬁeld just alluded to whereas in a few he discussed

the DR phenomenon, - without explicitly citing Garﬁeld (1980a). We consider, as

per the standard scientometric practice, that the latter paper was cited only when


## reference is included in the bibliography of the citing paper. In all we found 26 papers




June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

6

of Garﬁeld focused on the DR phenomenon. Among these 26 articles, 23 appeared

in CC; 2 papers, i.e., Garﬁeld (2000) and Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004), appeared in

The Scientist (TS). Like CC, the latter magazine was also founded (in 1986) and

edited by Garﬁeld. Garﬁeld & Welljams-Dorof (1992) is his only article on DR that

appeared in a journal not founded, owned or edited by him.

The articles published in CC magazine were later compiled into 15 volumes

of

the

Essays

of

an

Information Scientist (EIS) (https://garﬁeld.library.upenn.edu/essays.html). Dur-

ing our investigation, we found that some confusion persists for the bibliographic

information when the same articles are referred to from the two sources and many

times are misquoted. Therefore, in Table 1 we list Garﬁeld’s all publications on the

DR phenomenon providing complete information of papers published in CC and

their corresponding information in EIS. Furthermore, we also show which of his 24

subsequent articles on DR phenomenon cite Garﬁeld (1980a). As can be seen from

Table 1, there are 20 self-citations. To complete the data we add these self-citations

to the citations collected from GS, WoS and Scopus, for the respective years of

publication. This dataset of 234 citing papers, 214 from three citation databases

plus 20 self-citations from CC, forms the basis of our analysis. The time series is

displayed on Fig.1.

Of the Garﬁeld’s 26 articles on DR phenomenon none of his 23 articles from

CC are listed as having cited Garﬁeld (1980a) in WoS and Scopus whereas Garﬁeld

(1990a), the lone article listed in GS, is wrongly listed as a citation for year 1998.

Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004), article from “The Scientist” magazine is his only article

covered by all the three databases whereas Garﬁeld & Welljams-Dorof (1992) is

covered by GS only. These ﬁndings align well with prior studies on the inadequate

coverage of Garﬁeld’s oeuvre by the three databases (Jasco 2010, 2018).


## 3. Analysis and results


We trace out the citation trajectory of Garﬁeld (1980a) in Fig. 1. In the inset

plot, we show the yearly citations received by the paper, including the self-citations

identiﬁed in Table 1, whereas the corresponding yearly citation counts without self-

citations are shown in the main plot. Recall that depiction of the citation frequencies

in two plots is intentional for the application of two diﬀerent criteria for identifying

a paper as being a case of DR (i) one set by Garﬁeld himself and (ii) the recent one

prescribed by van Raan (2004a).

Garﬁeld set quantitative criteria for identiﬁcation of DR papers in terms of the

temporal accumulation of their citations, in 1989, a decade after Garﬁeld (1980a).

According to Garﬁeld (1989a) for a highly cited paper to qualify as an example of

DR it must satisfy two criteria (i) low citation frequencies for the ﬁrst 5 or more

years, - with more than 10 years preferable (ii) low initial citation frequency of

about an average of one cite per year for a typical paper. Later Garﬁeld (1990a)

set more speciﬁc criteria: (i) a threshold of 10 or fewer citations to a paper at age



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

7

20

20

18

18

16

14

#Citations

12

16

10

8

14

6

4

#Citations

12

2

0

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

2020

2024

10

Year

8

6

4

2

0

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

2020

2024

Year

Fig. 1: Yearly citations to Garﬁeld (1980a) (main plot excludes self citations). Inset

plot is for all citations including self-citations.

10 and (ii) a 10-fold increase in citations at age 20. Importantly, Garﬁeld does not

exclude self-citations to an article from the analysis, as is the current practice, when

deciding on its DR.

From the inset plot in Fig.1, it can be seen that Garﬁeld (1980a) received 21

citations up to year 1990. This count amounts to an average of about 1.91( 21

11)

citations per year,- a number higher than average of one citation per year as required

by Garﬁeld (1989a). Note that this citation count includes 16 self-citations two out

of which, Garﬁeld (1980b, 1980c), came in the year of publication itself. Therefore,

the paper does not satisfy the ﬁrst criterion; 10 or fewer citation in ﬁrst decade of

publication. Having received only 4 citations, 3 of them being self-citations (2 for

year 1992 and 1 for 1993), the next decade [1991-2000] of its citation life was even

more miserable. Obviously the citation count of 4 is a far cry from 210 citations,

10 fold of 21, those, accumulated in the ﬁrst life time decade, as demanded by

Garﬁeld’s second criterion.

The paper attracted 31 citations in third decade, 2000-2010, including one self-

citation, Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004). Although this citation count is larger than 25,

accumulated in the ﬁrst two decades, nevertheless it is still very short of 210, the

10-fold increase in citations. With a total citation count of 234 the Garﬁeld (1980a)

paper has struggled in the entire course of its citation life, to meet the second

criterion set, Garﬁeld (1990a), by its own author.

But for his self-citations the DR phenomenon was forgotten for two and a half



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

8

decades after Garﬁeld (1980a). The phenomenon came back live after it was revisited

by van Raan (2004a), albeit using a diﬀerent terminology, calling papers having

suﬀered DR as “Sleeping Beauties”. For their deﬁnition/identiﬁcation van Raan

(2004a) prescribed a criteria diﬀerent than the one set in Garﬁeld (1989a, 1990a).

The van Raan criteria are based on three main variables: (1) depth of sleep, i.e., the

article receives at most one citation on average per year (deep sleep), or between

one to two citations on average per year during a speciﬁc period (less deep sleep);

(2) the length of sleep, i.e., the duration of the above period; and (3) the awakening

intensity, i.e., the number of citations per year, during four years following the

sleeping period. Later on van Raan (2015) prescribed that (4) SBs on average be

cited more than ﬁve times a year in the awakening stage. Note that van Raan

(2004a) criterion diﬀers from that of Garﬁeld (1980a) in excluding the self-citations

from the analysis. Next, we use the these criteria to asses whether Garﬁeld (1980)

paper is a SB or not.

From the citation trajectory shown in the main plot of Fig. 1, it can be seen that

Garﬁeld (1980a) received only 10 citations in 25 years, 1980-2004, of its publication

and therefore with an average of less than one, 0.4( 10

25), citation: it was in a state

of deep sleep for this period. It is incredible that up to year 2002, for 23 years, the

maximum number of yearly citations never crossed the citation count of one.

In respect to the awakening intensity, the paper awoke in year 2007, 28 years

after its publication, when it received 20 citations; with yearly citations of 3, 7, 7,

3, up to 2010. Thus as per van Raan (2004a) criteria, Garﬁeld (1980a) paper on DR

phenomenon is a clear case of DR itself and hence a SB.

The comparison of the two plots in Fig. 1 clearly indicate that for 14 years, 1980-

1993, Garﬁeld pursued the phenomenon vigorously; 19 self citations, but the wider

scientiﬁc community, - only 5 citations in this period, failed to appreciate his idea of

DR. Notice that due to complete absence of self-citations the two plots are exactly

same for 1994-2003 period. The lull in self-citations is indicative of a decade of hiatus

by Garﬁeld in this research ﬁeld again possibly fueled by lack of any appreciation.

This conjecture is supported by the skepticism of DR phenomenon expressed in

Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004). From year 2005 onwards both the plots in Fig. 1 have

the same number of yearly citations. This is due to the absence of any further self-

citations to Garﬁeld (1980a) after Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004). Interestingly, a year

after in 2005 the citations to the paper increased to 4, maximum count for any given

year upto this year, for the ﬁrst time since its publication. Then onwards the paper

started to attract more than one citations regularly reaching a maximum of 19 in

year 2018 an indication of renewed interest in DR phenomenon.

Notice that Gl¨anzel et al., (2003) and Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004) analyzed about

half a million papers of the 1980 edition of the SCI and concluded that nearly all

signiﬁcant research is well cited within the ﬁrst three to ﬁve years of publication.

Both 1980, the year of edition of their data source, and 2004, the year of publi-

cation of their analysis are ironic. In the former year, Garﬁeld (1980a) discussed



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

9

the phenomenon in the historical perspective, coining the term DR, whereas in the

latter year when Garﬁeld called the phenomenon only a myth, following van Raan

(2004a), he saw its rebirth. Furthermore, had Garﬁeld included Garﬁeld (1980a)

paper in his analysis, he would have been surprised to know that up to 2004 other

researchers had given his paper on DR, a dismal of 10 citations, and that it had got

a new lease of citation life after the year 2004, he would have reached an opposite


## conclusion on the occurrence of the phenomenon.



## 4. Discussion


The modest increase in citations to Garﬁeld (1980a) after year 2004 follows the

publication of van Raan (2004a) who borrowed the term “Sleeping Beauty“ from

French folklore to describe the phenomenon and literally took the ﬁeld of sciento-

metrics by storm. Sugimoto & Mostafa (2018) question such a terminology for being

culturally insensitive. van Raan’s criteria for the identiﬁcation of SB are broadly

similar to those of Garﬁeld’s for DR; both prescribe certain period of no citations for

a paper (sleeping period) followed by sudden increase in its citations (awakening).

The fact that van Raan (2004a) received immediate attention whereas response to

Garﬁeld’s work has been largely lukewarm clearly indicates that use of the vivid

names did work in favor of the formers reception as is evident from the exponential

growth of literature on the subject. For further quantitative depiction of the latter

fact, we collected, on September 15, 2025, the yearly citations received by van Raan

(2004a) from GS; for a quick visual appreciation, we show these in Fig. 2. As can

be seen the paper received prompt attention, i.e., citations without even a delay of

a single year, after its appearance; therefore it was an instant hit. In fact, the paper

received 14 citations; with one self-citation van Raan (2005), in very second year of

its publication.

We show the yearly citations, blue curve in Fig. 2, received by Garﬁeld (1980a)

after van Raan (2004a). The citation revival of Garﬁeld (1980a) after year 2004 is

obvious. Nevertheless, a casual comparison of the their citation curves reveals that

the yearly citation counts of Garﬁeld (1980a) are no match to that of van Raan

(2004a), - with a trend continuing for their entire citation journey. It had taken 9

self-citations for the former paper to accumulate a citation count of 13 over a period

of 9 years upto 1988. The comparison with the delay of not a single year for van

Raan (2004a) to accumulate, 14 citations, more than that count does not demand

any other quantitative measure for reaching conviction. Furthermore, the wait for

Garﬁeld (1980a) to achieve this citation goal gets longer by an incredible two and

half decades; 25 years up to 2005, when its self-citations are discounted. Garﬁeld

(1980a) during its 45 years of citation life has accumulated only 234 citations (all


## databases) more than the corresponding 262 van Raan (2004a) has collected upto


2015 i.e. in only eleven years of its publication.

Recall that van Raan (2004a) does not cite Garﬁeld (1980a); the former paper

has a very short bibliography, - with three references only, but was cited in the same



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

10

70

Garfield (1980a)

van Raan (2004a)

Co-citations

60

50

40

#Citations

30

20

10

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

0

Year

Fig. 2: Comparison of yearly citations to Garﬁeld (1980a) and van Raan (2004a)

[self-citations are included for both papers].

year (van Raan, 2004b), when reviewing the quantitative measures for the ”evalu-

ation of science”. Lack of a citation and much smaller number of yearly citations

to Garﬁeld (1980a) compared to van Raan (2004a), blue and black curves in Fig.

2, on the surface, suggest that later paper is not the ”prince“ who awakened the

former. Such a conjecture is negated when the co-citations of the two are taken

into account. Through out their citation journey the curve for the co-citations of

the two papers, green color in Fig. 2, is seen to be closer to the citation curve of

Garﬁeld (1980a) indicating a high rate of co-citations;- peaks for years 2012, 2016

and 2023 are readily notable. Garﬁeld (1980a) received a total of 187 citations after

van Raan (2004a) out of which the two papers are co-cited 141 times i.e.- about 75%

( 141

187), a high co-citation rate indeed. Therefore, van Raan (2004a) is a ”prince“ who

just had a glimpse, without a kiss, on the Garﬁeld (1980a), - the SB. Furthermore,

even after 2007, the year of its awakening, the yearly citations of the latter are very

modest compared to those of its ”prince“ therefore indicating that the SB has had

only a ”feeble awakening“.

Having established that van Raan (2004a) is its prince we now calculate the

beauty coeﬃcient of Garﬁeld (1980a). Introduced by Ke et al., (2015), the index

takes into account the peak citations and the year of its occurrence in the citation

curve of a SB. Given that the citation curve of Garﬁeld (1980a), main plot in

Fig. 1, has two peaks of 19 citations for year 2018 and 2023, there respectively

are two beauty coeﬃcients viz. 159.55 and 144.62 (Li & Ye, 2016). Nevertheless,



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

11

both the values of the beauty coeﬃcient yield the same awakening time of 26 years

corresponding to year 2006. The awakening year of 2006 is in close agreement to

2007, obtained from van Raan (2004a)’s criteria. Pertinently Ke et al., (2015) showed

that Garﬁeld has another much severe SB to his credit i.e. Garﬁeld (1955), which

paper had slept for 50 years before being awakened around year 2000.

In conclusion, although highly inﬂuential, Garﬁeld (1980a) is another example

of these highly under-cited articles yet it is not covered in Rousseau & Hu (2018).

Perhaps Garﬁeld (1991b) had an inkling of his un(under)-citedness when he consoled

a scientist that there is no shame in being so.


## 5. Conclusion


Garﬁeld is an undisputed giant of information science having multiple contributions

to the ﬁeld. Previously, beﬁtting to his stature, the impact of his contributions on

a wider ﬁeld of ”science of science“ has been widely discussed. Here we studied

the response to ”delayed recognition”, a phenomenon Garﬁeld investigated for over

more than two decades. In order to do so, we perform a thorough analysis of citation

history of the Garﬁeld (1980a) paper which coined the term ”delayed recognition“.

Ironically we found it to have suﬀered the same fate which it had started to bring

to the notice of our wide scientiﬁc community. Despite frequently self-citing his

paper Garﬁeld could not prevent 28 years delay of its recognition through citations.

Having been in a state of deep sleep for 28 years the paper is clearly a ”Sleeping

Beauty” seeing the revival of its citations following van Raan (2004a) kiss. These


## results are surprising when seen in the light of the theme of the Garﬁeld (1980a)


paper and his work on the phenomenon.


## References



## 1. Barber, B. (1961). Resistance by scientists to scientiﬁc discovery. Science, 134,


596-602.


## 2. Bornmann, L., Haunschild, R., & Leydesdroﬀ, L. (2018). Reference publication


year spectroscopy (RPYS) of Garﬁeld’s publications. Scientometrics, 114, 439-

448.


## 3. Braun, T., Gl¨anzel, W., & Schubert, A. (2010). On sleeping beauties, princes


and other tales of citation distributions. Research Evaluation, 19(3), 195-202.


## 4. Chen,


C.

(2018).

Garﬁeld’s

scholarly

impact:

a

scientometric

review.

Scientometrics, 114, 489-516.


## 5. Cole, S. (1970). Professional standing and the reception of scientiﬁc discoveries.


American Journal of Sociology, 76, 286-306.


## 6. Costas, R., van Leeuwen, T. N., & van Raan, A. F. J. (2010). Is scientiﬁc liter-


ature subject to a ’Sell-By-Date’? A general methodology to analyze the ’dura-

bility’ of scientiﬁc publications. Journal of the American Society for Information

Science and Technology, 61(2), 329-339.



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

12


## 7. Fazeli-Varzaneh, M., Ghorbi, A., Ausloos, M., Sallinger, E., & Vahdati, S. (2021).


Sleeping beauties of coronavirus research. IEEE Access, 9, 21192-21205.


## 8. Garﬁeld, E. (1955). Citation index for science; a new dimension in documentation


through association of ideas Science, 122(3159), 108-111.


## 9. Garﬁeld, E. (1970). Would Mendel’s work have been ignored if the Science Ci-


tation Index was available 100 years ago? Current Contents, 2, 5-6.


## 10. Garﬁeld, E. (1980a). Premature discovery or delayed recognition-why? Current


Contents, 21, 5-10.


## 11. Garﬁeld, E. (1980b). Multiple independent discovery & creativity in science


Current Contents, 44, 5-10.


## 12. Garﬁeld, E. (1980c). Are the 1979 Prizewinners of Noble Class? Current Con-


tents, 38, 5-13.


## 13. Garﬁeld, E. (1983). How to use citation analysis for faculty evaluation, and


when it is relevant? part 2. Current Contents, 45, 5-14.


## 14. Garﬁeld, E. (1984a). The 1982 articles most cited in 1982 and 1983. 1. Life


sciences. Current Contents, 45, 3-15.


## 15. Garﬁeld, E. (1984b). The awards of science: Beyond the Nobel Prize. Part 2.


The winners and their most-cited papers. Current Contents, 50, 3-17.


## 16. Garﬁeld, E. (1985a). The 1983 Nobel prizes: Part 2. Myth or reality: Premature


discovery is not the same as being ignored! Barbara McClintock and the prize

in medicine. Current Contents, 7, 3-10.


## 17. Garﬁeld, E. (1985b). The 1983 articles most cited in 1983 and 1984. 1. Life


Sciences. Current Contents, 47, 3-18.


## 18. Garﬁeld, E. (1986a). Do Nobel prize winners write citation classics? Current


Contents, 23, 3-8.


## 19. Garﬁeld, E. (1986b). The 1985 Nobel chemistry to Jerome Karle and Herbert A.


Hauptman and the physics prize to Klaus von Klitzing contrast delayed versus

instant recognition. Current Contents, 44, 3-12.


## 20. Garﬁeld, E. (1988). Journal citation studies. 48. Developmental biology jour-


nals: citation analysis demonstrates the multidisciplinary nature of modern em-

bryology. Current Contents, 11, 3-12.


## 21. Garﬁeld, E. (1989a). Delayed recognition in scientiﬁc discovery: citation fre-


quency analysis aids the search for case histories. Current Contents, 23, 3-9.


## 22. Garﬁeld, E. (1989b). Postmature scientiﬁc discovery and the sexual recombina-


tion of bacteria- the shared perspective of a scientist and a sociologist. Current

Contents, 3, 3-10.


## 23. Garﬁeld, E. (1989c). More delayed recognition. Part 1. Examples from the ge-


netics of color blindness, the entropy of short-term memory, phosphoinositides,

and polymer rheology, Three letters from the Current Contents readers on de-

layed recognition. Current Contents, 38, 3-8.


## 24. Garﬁeld, E. (1989d). Lyme disease research uncovers a case of delayed recogni-


tion: Arvid Afzelius and his successors. Current Contents, 49, 3-8.



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

13


## 25. Garﬁeld, E. (1990a). More delayed recognition. Part 2. From inhibin to scanning


electron microscopy. Current Contents, 9, 3-9.


## 26. Garﬁeld, E. (1990b). The most cited papers of all time, SCI 1945-1988. Part


1B. Superstars New to SCI Top 100. Current Contents, 8, 3-13.


## 27. Garﬁeld, E. (1990c). Scientiﬁc biography-Contemporary reﬂections on the ex-


citement and fascination of science. Current Contents, 5, 3-5.


## 28. Garﬁeld, E. (1990d). The most-cited physical-sciences publications in 1945-1954


science citation index. part 3. Forty-two citation classics in astronomy and earth

sciences. Current Contents, 43, 3-14.


## 29. Garﬁeld, E. (1990e). Of atomic clocks, ion traps, and quantum leaps: the 1989


Nobel Prize in Physics is awarded to Norman F. Ramsey, Wolfgan Pauli, and G.

Dehmet. Current Contents, 35, 3-13.


## 30. Garﬁeld, E. (1991a). The 1986 most-cited chemistry articles: enzymes in or-


ganic synthesis and Odd-Cluster soot up, while superconductivity disappears

(for now). Current Contents, 27, 3-15.


## 31. Garﬁeld, E. (1991b). To be an uncited scientist is no cause for shame. The


Scientist, 5(6), 12, 390-391.


## 32. Garﬁeld, E., (1992). Of noble classes: Part 2. Forecasting Nobel Prize using


citation data and the odds against it. Current Contents, 35, 3-12.


## 33. Garﬁeld, E., & Welljams-Dorof, A. (1992). Of noble classes: a citation perspec-


tive on high impact research authors. Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics, 13,

117-135.


## 34. Garﬁeld, E. (1993). To what extent is the research literature cited? Lowell


Hargens and David Bott examine citation rates in sociology. Current Contents,

5, 3-12.


## 35. Garﬁeld, E. (2000). The evolution of ”Hot papers“. The Scientist, 14, 4-7.



## 36. Garﬁeld,


E.

(1973-1993). Essays

of

an

Information

Scientist,

https

:

//garfield.library.upenn.edu/pub.html, last updated 2016.


## 37. Gl¨anzel, W., & Schoepﬂin, U. (1995). A bibliometric study on aging and recep-


tion process of scientiﬁc literature. Journal of Information Science, 21(1), 37-53.


## 38. Gl¨anzel, W., Schlemmer, B., & Thijs, B. (2003). Better late than never? On


the chance to become highly cited only beyond the standard bibliometric time

horizon. Scientometrics, 58(3), 571–586.


## 39. Gl¨anzel, W., & Garﬁeld, E. (2004). The myth of delayed recognition?. The


Scientist, 18(11), 8-10.


## 40. Gl¨anzel, W. (2007). Characteristic scores and scales-: A bibliometric analysis


of subject characteristics based on long-term citation observation. Journal of

Informetrics, 1(1), 92-102.


## 41. Grimm, J. & Grimm, W. (1812). Dornr¨oschen in Grimm’s Household Tales


Vol. 1. Translated by Hunt, Margaret. Introduction by Andrew Lang. London:

George Bell & Sons. pp. iii, 197–200.


## 42. Hou, J., Li, H., & Zhang., Y. (2023). Altmetrics-based sleeping beauties: neces-




June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

14

sity or just a supplement Scientometrics, 128, 5477-5506.


## 43. Jasco, P. (2005). Google Scholar: the pros and cons. Online information Review,


29, 208-214.


## 44. Jasco, P. (2010). The impact of Garﬁeld through the prism of Web of Science.


Annals of Library and Information Studies, 57, 222-247.


## 45. Jasco, P. (2018). The scientometric portrait of Garﬁeld through free Re-


searcherID service from Web of Science Core Collection of 67 million master

records and 1.3 billion references. Scientometrics, 114, 545-555.


## 46. Jiang, H., Zhou, J., Ding, Y., & Zeng, A. (2024). Overcoming recognition de-


lays in disruptive research: The impact of team size, familiarity, and reputation.

Journal of Informetrics, 18(4), 01549.


## 47. Ke, Q., Ferrara, E., Radicchi, F., & Flammini, A. (2016). Deﬁning and identify-


ing sleeping beauties in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,

112(24), 7426-7431.


## 48. Levitt, J., & Thelwall, M. (2007). Atypical citation patterns in the twenty most


highly cited documents in library and information science . Proceedings of ISSI

2007 -11th International conference of the International Society for Scientomet-

rics and Informetrics, 485-588.


## 49. Li, J., & Ye, F.Y. (2012). The phenomenon of all-elements-sleeping-beauties in


scientiﬁc literature. Scientometrics, 92, 795-799.


## 50. Li, J., & Ye, F.Y. (2016). Distinguishing sleeping beauties in science.


Scientometrics, 108, 821-823.


## 51. Li, J., & Shi, D. (2016). Sleeping beauties in genius work: When were they awak-


ened?. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,

67(2), 432-440.


## 52. Merton, R. K. (1963). Resistance to the systematic study of multiple discoveries


in science. European Journal of Sociology, 159, 237-282.


## 53. Mir, T. A., & Ausloos, M. (2018). Benford’s law: A ”sleeping beauty“ sleeping in


the dirty pages of logarithmic tables. Journal of the Association for Information

Science and Technology, 69(3), 349-358.


## 54. Miura, T., Asatani, K., & Sakata, I. (2021). Large scale analysis of delayed


recognition using sleeping beauty and the prince. Applied Network Science, 6,

Article No. 48, 2-28.


## 55. Pandey, S. & Gupta, D. K.(2021). A scientometric analysis and visualization


of the 50 highly cited papers of Garﬁeld. Annals of Library and Information

Science, 68, 135-144.


## 56. Peirce, C. S. (1884). The numerical measure of the success of predictions.


Science, 4(93), 453-454.


## 57. Perrault, C. (1697). Histoires ou Contes du temps pass´e, Barbin Ed., Paris.



## 58. Rousseau, R. & Hu, X. (2018). Under-cited inﬂuential work by Garﬁeld.


Scientometrics, 114, 651-657.


## 59. Simkin, M. V. & Roychowdhury, V. P. (2007). A mathematical theory of citing.


Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 58(11), 1661-



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

15

1673.


## 60. Stent, G. S. (1972). Prematurity and uniqueness in scientiﬁc discovery. Scientiﬁc


American, 227(6), 84-93.


## 61. Sugimoto, C. R. & Mostafa, J. (2018). A note of concern and context: On careful


use of terminology. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and

Technology, 69(1), 347-348.


## 62. Thelwall, M. (2017). A decade of Garﬁeld readers. Scientometrics, 114, 669-674.



## 63. Van Calster, B. (2012). It takes time: A remarkable example of delayed recog-


nition. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,

63(11), 2341-2344.


## 64. van Dalen, H. P. & Henkens, K. (2005). Signals in science. On the importance


of signaling in gaining attention in science. Scientometrics, 64(2), 209-233.


## 65. van Raan, A. F. J. (2004a). Sleeping beauties in science. Scientometrics, 59(3),


461-466.


## 66. van Raan, A. F. J. (2004b). Measuring Science. Handbook of Quantitative


Science and Technology Research, 19-50.


## 67. van Raan, A. F. J. (2005). For your citations only? Hot topics in bibliometric



## analysis. Measurement, 3(1), 50-62.



## 68. van Raan, A. F. J. (2015). Dormitory of physical and engineering sciences:


Sleeping beauties may be sleeping innovations. PLoS ONE 10(10), e0139786


## 69. Wang, J., Ma, F., Chen, M., & Rao, Y. (2012). Why and how can “sleeping


beauties” be awakened?. The Electronic Library, 30(1), 5-18.


## 70. Winnink, J. J., Tijssen, J. W. R., & van Raan, A. F. J. (2019). Searching


for new breakthroughs in science: How eﬀective are computerized algorithms?.

Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 146, 673-686.


## 71. Wyatt, H. V., (1975). Knowledge and prematurity- journey from transformation


to DNA. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 18(2), 149-156.


## 72. Ye, F. Y., & Bornmann, L. (2018). “Smart girls” versus “sleeping beauties” in


the sciences: The identiﬁcation of instant and delayed recognition by using the ci-

tation angle. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology,

69(3), 359-367.



June 4, 2026

0:55

arxiv˙mir

16

Table 1: Garﬁeld’s papers on DR arranged in chronological order, Note: CC stands

for Current Contents, EIS for Essays of an Information Scientist, TS for The Sci-

entist and TMS for Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics

No.

Paper

CC

CC

CC

ESI

ESI

Cites

Issue

pages

Date

Volume

pages

Garﬁeld (1980a)

1

Garﬁeld (1970)

2

5 - 6

January 14

1

69 - 70

2

Garﬁeld (1980a)

21

5 - 10

May 26

4

488 - 493

3

Garﬁeld (1980b)

44

5 - 10

November 3

4

660 - 665

Yes

4

Garﬁeld (1980c)

38

5 - 13

September 22

4

609 - 617

Yes

5

Garﬁeld (1983)

45

5 - 14

November 7

6

363 - 372

Yes

6

Garﬁeld (1984a)

45

3 - 15

November 5

7

353 - 365

Yes

7

Garﬁeld (1984b)

50

3 - 17

December 10

7

405 - 419

Yes

8

Garﬁeld (1985a)

7

3 - 10

February 18

8

60 - 67

No

9

Garﬁeld (1985b)

47

3 - 18

November 25

8

444 - 459

Yes

10

Garﬁeld (1986a)

23

3 - 8

June 9

9

182 - 187

Yes

11

Garﬁeld (1986b)

44

3 - 12

November 3

9

336 - 345

Yes

12

Garﬁeld (1988)

11

3 - 12

March 14

11

75 - 84

Yes

13

Garﬁeld (1989a)

23

3 - 9

June 5

12

154 - 159

Yes

14

Garﬁeld (1989b)

3

3 - 10

January 16

12

16 - 17

Yes

15

Garﬁeld (1989c)

38

3 - 8

September 18

12

264 - 269

Yes

16

Garﬁeld (1989d)

49

3 - 8

December 4

12

345 - 350

No

17

Garﬁeld (1990a)

9

3 - 9

February 26

13

68 - 74

Yes

18

Garﬁeld (1990b)

8

3 - 13

February 19

13

57 - 67

Yes

19

Garﬁeld (1990c)

5

3 - 5

January 29

13

29 - 31

Yes

20

Garﬁeld (1990d)

43

3 - 14

October 22

13

387 - 398

Yes

21

Garﬁeld (1990e)

35

3 - 13

August 27

13

316 - 326

No

22

Garﬁeld (1992)

35

3 - 12

August 31

15

127 - 136

Yes

23

Garﬁeld &

Yes

Welljams-Dorof (1992)

TMB

24

Garﬁeld (1993)

5

3 - 12

February 1

15

228 - 237

Yes

25

Garﬁeld (2000)

TS

No

26

Gl¨anzel & Garﬁeld (2004)

TS

Yes