Quantifying the Knowledge Proximity Between Academic and

Industry Research: An Entity and Semantic Perspective

Hongye Zhao a, Yi Zhao b, Chengzhi Zhang a,

a Department of Information Management, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094 China

b School of Management, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China.


## Abstract: The academia and industry are characterized by a reciprocal shaping and dynamic feedback


mechanism. Despite distinct institutional logics, they have adapted closely in collaborative publishing and

talent mobility, demonstrating tension between institutional divergence and intensive collaboration. Existing

studies on their knowledge proximity mainly rely on macro indicators such as the number of collaborative

papers or patents, lacking an analysis of knowledge units in the literature. This has led to an insufficient grasp

of fine-grained knowledge proximity between industry and academia, potentially undermining collaboration

frameworks and resource allocation efficiency. To remedy the limitation, this study quantifies the trajectory

of academia-industry co-evolution through fine-grained entities and semantic space. In the entity

measurement part, we extract fine-grained knowledge entities via pre-trained models, measure sequence

overlaps using cosine similarity, and analyze topological features through complex network analysis. At the

semantic level, we employ unsupervised contrastive learning to quantify convergence in semantic spaces by

measuring cross-institutional textual similarities. Finally, we use citation distribution patterns to examine

correlations between bidirectional knowledge flows and similarity. Analysis reveals that knowledge

proximity between academia and industry rises, particularly following technological change. This provides

textual evidence of bidirectional adaptation in co-evolution. Additionally, academia’s knowledge dominance

weakens during technological paradigm shifts. Knowledge within the field exhibits a more balanced and

reciprocal pattern, promoting the transformation of academia-industry relations from institutional logic

divergence to knowledge production synergy. The dataset and code for this paper can be accessed at

https://github.com/tinierZhao/Academic-Industrial-associations.

Keywords: Academia-industry knowledge proximity; Fine-grained knowledge entity; Semantic space;

Bidirectional knowledge flow

 Corresponding author. E-maiL: zhangcz@njust.edu.cn.

1



1 Introduction

As the two core subjects of the innovation ecosystem, the co-evolution between academia and industry

(Blankenberg & Buenstorf, 2016; Lewin & Volberda, 1999), not only breaks through the unidirectional

sequence of the traditional linear model of innovation (Bush, 1945), but also influences the scientific and

technological policy research focus through the reconfiguration of the knowledge production paradigm

(Elzinga, 1997; Hoppmann, 2021; Nsanzumuhire et al., 2021).

Multi-dimensional adaptations such as the unification of technical standards and the flow of innovative

factors (Aufrant, 2022; Blankenberg & Buenstorf, 2016; Chai & Shih, 2016; Jiang et al., 2024) have laid the

foundation for bilateral synergy. However, there are still tensions hindering in-depth cooperation (Vallas &

Kleinman, 2007), including differences in research orientations (Gans et al., 2017; Merton, 1968; Teece,

1986), the divergence between academic reputation incentives and industrial competition and confidentiality

mechanisms (Chirico et al., 2020; Clarysse et al., 2023; Haeussler, 2011), and cooperation frictions caused

by high transaction costs (Meissner et al., 2022; Zaini et al., 2018). To address tensions in collaboration, there

has been a continuous increase in specific policies aimed at optimizing academia-industry collaboration and

improving the efficiency of innovation output (Hoppmann, 2021; Perkmann et al., 2013). These policies

promote closer industry-academia ties and accelerate the innovation process (Bikard & Marx, 2020). This

close relationship is characterized by the proximity, such as geographical proximity, and institutional

proximity. They directly affect the initiation probability and frequency of academia-industry collaboration

and the quality of research output (Rossi et al., 2024).

As a key dimension of proximity, knowledge (or cognitive) proximity characterizes the similarity and

consistency of the knowledge bases between subjects (Brown & Duguid, 1998; Nooteboom, 2000; Rossi et

al., 2024). It can both reveal the static features of their knowledge matching and dynamically track the actual

effects of their collaboration (Song & Wei, 2024; Syafiandini et al., 2024). It presents unique regularities in

the influence mechanisms, interaction effects, and innovation outcomes of collaboration (Nooteboom et al.,

2007). However, policy promotion has limited effectiveness in practice as it fails to resolve core issues such

as the misalignment of industrial and academic knowledge bases (Fischer et al., 2019). It should be noted

that this study takes knowledge proximity as the core research object. Similarity refers specifically to the

quantitative characterization of knowledge proximity, while interaction is the external manifestation of this

proximity between industry and academia, as shown in Fig. 1.

2



Fig. 1. Conceptual framework diagram of proximity, similarity, and interaction

The precise quantification of knowledge proximity has become a core lever for optimizing academia-

industry collaboration models, aligning research directions, and balancing commercial value with public

needs (Caviggioli et al., 2023; Hoppmann, 2021; Zaini et al., 2018). Specifically, knowledge proximity can

reduce communication costs and accelerate knowledge flow (Chen, Mao, Ma, et al., 2024; Dolfsma & van

der Eijk, 2016; Sudhindra et al., 2020). The gap between industry and academia can hinder knowledge

dissemination and affect technological upgrading progress (Fischer et al., 2019; Hoppmann, 2021). From a

social interest perspective, collaboration with close knowledge domains can better enhance the understanding

of societal needs and create greater value for society (Rossi et al., 2017; Villani et al., 2017), thereby avoiding

the neglect of public value under industry dominance (Ahmed et al., 2023). However, an imbalance in

knowledge proximity can also trigger reverse effects. Heterogeneous knowledge is crucial for innovation

performance (Rodan & Galunic, 2004). Excessively close knowledge proximity may lead to technological

lock-in and path dependency within the industry (Hoppmann, 2021). Therefore, accurately grasping the

knowledge proximity can both provide support for the dynamic adjustment of academia-industry

collaboration strategies and offer a theoretical basis and practical guidance for the government to formulate

relevant policies.

Previous studies have mainly relied on structured data to measure the knowledge proximity. For instance,

Fischer et al. (2019) measured the academia-industry synergy with a patent collaboration network. Similarly,

Blankenberg and Buenstorf (2016) analyzed paper and patent collaborations as well as talent mobility

between industry and universities through name matching. Some scholars have utilized subclasses of the

International Patent Classification (IPC) (Caviggioli et al., 2023; Colombelli et al., 2021) to calculate patent

share differences across technology categories via Euclidean distances for technology convergence trends.

However, IPC categories are overly broad, and the classification system updates lag technological evolution

(Aceves & Evans, 2024). Liu and Zhu (2023) quantified inter-organizational cooperation stability using the

𝑇𝑢𝑖𝑔 index within the Triple Helix model framework.

3



The bibliometric advantage of these macro indicators is the convenience of processing structured data

(Puccetti et al., 2023). However, most information in scientific literature is encoded as unstructured strings

(Ding et al., 2013), and traditional analyses fail to capture the detailed technical content. Although text mining

techniques have supplemented traditional bibliometric indicators, existing text mining techniques for

measuring knowledge linkage and similarity, including topic models and keyword extraction methods, still

have limitations (Ba et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Glänzel & Thijs, 2017; Liu & Zhu, 2023; Meng et al.,

2024). Topic models are constrained by the subjectivity of topics and their coarse-grained representations,

while keyword extraction suffers from interference from generic terms and a lack of domain specificity,

making it difficult to achieve a precise characterization of technical details. This results in the unclear

proximity between academia and industry in fine-grained knowledge production, which may affect the

formulation of cooperation strategies between the two sectors and the government’s allocation of research

resources.

As the basic units and structural elements of knowledge in literature (Ding et al., 2013), knowledge

entities embody specific research methods, research tools, datasets, or evaluation criteria in literature (Zhang,

Zhang, et al., 2024), and serve as concrete elements for advancing the knowledge discovery process (Ding et

al., 2013). Concepts and conceptual spaces form the foundation of human cognition and organizational theory

(Aceves & Evans, 2024; Hofstadter & Sander, 2013). Encoding conceptual systems into multidimensional

semantic spaces enables high-density representations with minimal information loss and transforms concepts

and organizations into standardized geometric objects for cross-organizational comparisons (Aceves & Evans,

2024).

Based on this, this study aims to overcome the limitations of traditional bibliometric methods and

existing text mining techniques through fine-grained knowledge entities and semantic space. Taking the

technology evolution in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) from 2000–2022 as an empirical scenario,

we focus on the following three questions:

RQ1: How to construct a fine-grained measurement indicator to characterize knowledge proximity, to

address the limitations of existing macro-level measurement approaches?

As a key dimension for analyzing academia-industry synergy, its value lies not only in identifying static


## conclusions about the similarity between the knowledge bases of both parties but also in revealing the


dynamic patterns of proximity between industry and academia (Caviggioli et al., 2023; Fischer et al., 2019;

Hoppmann, 2021).

4



RQ2: How does the knowledge proximity between academia and industry change over time and with

technological paradigm shifts?

Existing theories suggest that the closer the knowledge proximity, the more similar the knowledge held

by the two parties, and the more conducive this is to knowledge flow (Chen, Mao, Ma, et al., 2024; Dolfsma

& van der Eijk, 2016; Sudhindra et al., 2020). In turn, cross-sector knowledge flow may further narrow

research gaps (Syafiandini et al., 2024). In this regard, we propose RQ3.

RQ3: What is the dynamic relationship between knowledge flow and knowledge proximity? Does this

relationship differ across distinct stages of technological development?

The main contributions of this paper are in the following three aspects:

First, we utilize text mining to provide a quantitative analysis method for knowledge proximity between

academia and industry. The measurement framework compensates for the lack of traditional research relying

on macro indicators to quantify knowledge proximity and provides a reusable quantitative tool for other fields.

Second, we provide evidence of a gradual increase in knowledge proximity between industry and

academia. This finding gives micro-level evidence of the symbiotic shift of the two from the asymmetry of

institutional logic to the level of knowledge production.

Third, the study confirms that knowledge flow in the field exhibits a reciprocal patter, providing a

theoretical basis for optimizing academia-industry collaboration and promoting efficient knowledge flow and

sharing.

2 Related work

This study focuses on the changes in knowledge proximity between academia and industry in NLP. In this

section, we review related work from two perspectives: measurement of knowledge proximity and linkages,

and Connections and differences between NLP academia and industry research.

2.1 Measurement of knowledge proximity and linkages

Current research on knowledge linkage measurement primarily focuses on citation analysis, semantic

mining of text representation, and multidimensional integration based on a complex network.

Citation analysis has its roots in the sociology of science (Price, 1965). The theory of scientific norms

proposed by Merton (1973) states that members of an academic community need to recognize and

acknowledge the contributions of others by making the basis of their research explicit through citations. In a

scientometrics perspective, the process of citation among scientific publications can be abstracted as an

5



explicit representation of knowledge flow (Tsay, 2015). As an ideal proxy indicator of knowledge flow, Lyu

et al. (2022) further state that citations between scientific publications or patents represent knowledge flow

from the cited entity to the citing entity.

In terms of methodology, the bibliographic coupling approach proposed by Glänzel and Thijs (2011)

model scientific literature through a Boolean vector space, where each dimension of the vector represents the

citation status (0/1 variable) of papers to specific references. The coupling strength between documents is

calculated via cosine similarity, with core literature filtered using specific threshold coupling angles (cos 70°

and cos 75°). Glänzel (2012) further introduced the h-index from network degree to reduce the level of

subjective intervention. Syafiandini et al. (2024) revealed a complex network structure of knowledge flow in

the field of pharmacology through a comprehensive analysis of institutions, institutional types, and

biomedical entities, showing that knowledge flow is dominated by academic institutions with bidirectional

flow between government and business. Chen et al. (2024) further used dynamic co-citation network analysis,

combining community detection algorithms with dynamic network analysis to examine the relationship

between internal and external science and technology in enterprises. The results show that the higher the

proportion of a company’s self-cited papers, the greater its patent output.

In the early stages of text representation, Shibata et al. (2010) pioneered research in the solar cell field,

demonstrating that the cosine similarity method with LOGTFIDF vectorization can identify implicit

knowledge associations between papers and patents. With the advancement of NLP and AI algorithms, neural

network-based modeling encodes complex meanings into dense geometric spaces with minimal distortion,

transforming unstructured text into measurable indicators to establish a mapping between theoretical

frameworks and empirical data (Aceves & Evans, 2024). An et al. (2021) introduced optimal transport theory

to optimize semantic matching, realizing a novel approach for measuring semantic similarity through the

theory’s core concepts. Alasehir and Acarturk (2022) used the Doc2vec model to quantify the

interdisciplinarity of cognitive science and found that its interdisciplinary index increased by 71% over a

decade. A subsequent study further constructed an integrated link prediction model to accurately identify

potential associations of scientific and technological themes in the pharmaceutical field (Xu et al., 2021).

Duede et al. (2024) measured the intellectual distance between articles through Doc2vec text embedding,

confirming that universities and research institutions effectively connect people across departments and that

cross-departmental collaboration promotes the integration of distant knowledge. Ba et al. (2024) further

combined temporal lead-lag distances of themes to detect technological opportunities, proposing four

6



coupling modes between scientific and technological themes and providing a new paradigm for technological

opportunity detection.

Complex networks integrate dual information of topological structures and semantic features. Glänzel

and Thijs (2017) identify domain core documents by combining literature citations and similarity of noun-

phrases extracted by TF-IDF through a joint citation network and text analysis approach. The science-

technology bipartite graph constructed by Chen et al. (2023) observed significant overlaps in terminology

and themes between patents and papers, indicating existing linkages. Meng et al. (2024) employed K-Core

decomposition and network coupling to explore the associations between science and technology in the

energy conservation domain. Building on this, Dahlke et al. (2024) used relational networks combined with

text embeddings to identify distances between companies and their AI adoption patterns, finding that AI

adopters tend to cluster tightly and form relatively closed systems.

Existing studies remain constrained by coarse-grained topic analysis (Aceves & Evans, 2024) and

reliance on macro-level indicators like citation frequency, which hinder fine-grained tracking of

technological concepts’ dynamic evolution. Scholars often depend on proxy metrics such as keyword co-

occurrence or are limited by small-sample manual coding. Furthermore, as Glänzel and Thijs (2017) point

out, terms and phrases used to express common knowledge bases or general vocabulary inherently lose

specificity. These limitations highlight the need to conduct fine-grained entity-level similarity analysis.

Parsing micro knowledge units can overcome the ambiguity of traditional macro indicators, offering a more

precise analytical dimension to capture the evolutionary trajectories of technical concepts.

For the information and contributions of related work, we have summarized it based on field, data, and


## methods, as shown in Table 1.


Table 1 Related works on the measurement of knowledge proximity and linkages

Type

Authors

Field


## Data



## Methods


Multiple disciplines

Glänzel (2012)

5,949 papers

Hirsch-type indices

in Web of Science

Citation

Syafiandini

et

1,275,536

pharmacology

Citation

linkage;

relationship

Pharmacology

al. (2024)

papers.

PKDE4J; KeyBERT


## analysis


Chen

et

al.

367,901 granted patents and

Dynamic

network

Genetic engineering

(2024)

266,665 papers.


## analysis; Louvain


Shibata et al.

19,063 papers and 10,694

Semantic

Solar Cell

TFIDF; LOGTFIDF

(2010)

patents published up to 2008

mining of text

SAO;

Needleman-

representation

An et al. (2021)

Thin film head

1,010 granted patents

Wunsch

7



Alasehir

and

118,000 papers

from

the

Cognitive science

Doc2vec

Acarturk (2022)

Annual Meetings conferences

Xu et al. (2021)

Pharmacology

9357 papers and 5817 patents

HMM-LDA; CDTM

Biochemistry, along

Duede

et

al.

543,936 papers and 12,149

with

14

other

Doc2vec;  SEM

(2024)

surveys.

disciplines

166,643

publications

and

Keybert; Atom Topic

Ba et al. (2024)

Energy conservation

91,593 patents were retained

Modeling(DATM)

Glänzel

and

Astronomy

and

Hirsch-type

indices

110,412 papers

Thijs (2017)

Astrophysics

TFIDF

Multidimension

Chen

et

al.

78,292 papers and 171,717

al

integration

NLP

Node2Vec; BERT

(2023)

NLP patents

based

on

Meng

et

al.

166,643

publications

and

KeyBert;

K-core

topological

Energy conservation

(2024)

91,593 patents were retained.

decomposition

structure

Dahlke

et

al.

1,140,494 company website

AI

BERT; BERTopic

(2024)

texts.

2.2 Connections and differences between NLP academia and industry

research

The co-evolution between academia and industry has reshaped technology R&D paths and knowledge

production models (Murmann, 2003; Nelson, 1994). It has shattered the unidirectional transmission of

knowledge in the traditional linear model (Brescia et al., 2016; Estrada et al., 2016). For instance, the Triple

Helix (Etzkowitz & Leydesdorff, 2000; Lawton Smith & Leydesdorff, 2014; Liu & Zhu, 2023), Quadruple

Helix (Carayannis & Campbell, 2012), and Knowledge Triangle (Meissner & Shmatko, 2017) all reveal the

core feature of bidirectional interaction.

As the fastest-growing subfield in the current AI domain (Haney, 2020), NLP has become a typical

scenario of academia-industry co-evolution. The new Transformer paradigm based on the self-attention

mechanism proposed by the industry (Vaswani et al., 2017) has reshaped academia’s research landscape and

spawned applications like the GPT series within four years, demonstrating the strong driving force behind

this co-evolution. The comparative analysis of academia-industry in NLP centers on three aspects: paper and

patent output, resource allocation, and talent/knowledge flow.

In terms of output characteristics, industry prioritizes technology implementation and commercial value,

excelling in patent layout; academia aims to expand knowledge boundaries and advance disciplines, with

stronger openness, and mainly produces papers (Gans et al., 2017; Haeussler, 2011). Though academia

remains the main source of NLP papers, co-authored works with corporate participation attract more citations

8



(Färber & Tampakis, 2024), and industrial teams hold distinct advantages in impact and technological

leadership, dominating the State of the Art (SOTA) models and delivering disruptive innovations (Liang et

al., 2024). Abdalla et al. (2023) empirical analysis of 78,187 NLP papers and 701 author resumes confirms

that large tech firms’ participation drives NLP technological iteration. In contrast, academia focuses on

cutting-edge, novel research topics (Chen, Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024). Regionally, the US and China

dominate NLP patent layout, with the US leading in industry and Chinese in academia (Al-Khalifa et al.,

2024).

Based on the classic resource dependence theory of Pfeffer and Salancik (1979), organizational strategic

choices are constrained by external resource acquisition capabilities. Leading industrial tech giants,

leveraging core resources like computing power and data (Ahmed et al., 2023; Färber & Tampakis, 2024),

have built strong resource appeal: establishing supercomputing clusters (e.g., Google TPU) with substantial

funds, accumulating massive high-quality datasets, and relying on open platforms (e.g., Azure AI, Google

Cloud) and open-source ecosystems, they continuously attract knowledge and talent from academic

institutions to industry (Shao et al., 2024). This high dependence on industrial resources has further

strengthened the industrial orientation of researchers’ career choices (Jiang et al., 2024). Stanford AI Index1


## data show that while 40.9% of new AI doctoral graduates entered industry and 41.6% entered academia in


2011, by 2022, the industry proportion surged to 70.7% versus only 20.0% for academia.

Notably, the talent flow is not unidirectionally imbalanced, but rather shows an increasing frequency of

bidirectional interaction. By tracking the career trajectories of ACM Distinguished Scientists in computer

science (CS), Jiang et al. (2024) identified four core flow paths within and across academia and industry,

which have generated significant knowledge spillover effects across departments, regions, and even countries.

This mobility is essentially a creative knowledge transformation process: scholars embed tacit research


## methods and scientific insights into corporate R&D systems (Trippl, 2013), promoting the implementation


of technology. At the same time, scholars also adjust their research interests according to new application

scenarios (Shao et al., 2024), transforming practical challenges in the industry into academic research issues.

This cross-institutional knowledge reorganization enhances the technical reserves of corporate R&D and also

fosters more exploratory innovations through the intensive flow of scientific knowledge (Chen, Mao, Ma, et

al., 2024; Lian et al., 2025).

1 https://hai.stanford.edu/ai-index/2024-ai-index-report/education

9



Despite existing studies revealing academia-industry interaction characteristics from three dimensions.

Most focus on case studies of specific regions or institutions and rely on macro indicators, failing to deeply

analyze content-level differences between the two. Clarifying the synergy and differentiation between

academia and industry from fine-grained knowledge differences is key to understanding the transformation

efficiency of academic theories to industrial applications in NLP and identifying their knowledge synergy

gaps. Lacking such fine-grained technical measurements to identify gaps, it becomes difficult to optimize the

collaboration model, while also risking academia gradually losing its public interest monitoring capability

under industry leadership (Ahmed et al., 2023). Based on this, this study combines textual technologies to

quantify knowledge proximity from entity and semantic perspectives, aiming to fill existing research gaps.

For the information and contributions of related work, we have summarized it based on field, data,


## methods, and main findings, as shown in Table 2.


Table 2 Related works on connections and differences between academia and industry.

Authors

Filed


## Data



## Methods


Main Findings

hundreds of thousands of

Papers produced by industrial teams

Mixed

effects

Liang et al.

articles from a dataset of AI

are more likely to be disruptive and

AI

regression 、Excess

(2024)

conferences; 173 notable AI

highly cited, and they propose more

self-citation analysis

models

SOTA models.

Industry is increasingly dominating

Ahmed et al.

115234 unique papers、

String-matching

AI

AI research, raising concerns about

(2023)

220232 authors

(Levenshtein)

its control

Large tech companies' presence in

Abdalla

et

78,187 NLP publications and

NLP

Fuzzy matching

NLP research has driven the field's

al. (2023)

701 author resumes

development and progress.

72,000 pure education papers,

AI research has indeed become

Färber

&

3800

Kruskal-Wallis

rank

more

important

than

purely

Tampakis

AI

cooperation papers, and 1500

variance test

academic AI research in recent

(2024)

pure company papers

years.

1444 ACM fellows 267,

The boundaries between academic

Jiang et al.

804 publications;

Difference-in-

CS

research and industrial innovation

(2024)

25,823 patents related to 205

difference (DID)

in the NLP field are blurring.

inventors

The United States and China hold

dominant positions in the NLP

Al-Khalifa

NLP

302,934 patents

BERTopic

invention landscape, with the US

et al. (2024)

leading in industry and China in

academia.

Shao et al.

Various

50,248 scholars and 1,004,464

The research difference between

PrefixSpan; LDA

(2024)

fields

papers

industry

and

academia

has

10



(includi

gradually decreases and reached a

ng CS)

steady state in recent years.

3 Methodology

The analysis of academia-industry knowledge proximity will be carried out through four dimensions:

similarity of entity bag-of-words vectors (explicit overlap of knowledge elements), semantic similarity

between text pairs (convergence of semantic conceptual space), coupling of entity networks (network

features), and bidirectional flow reinforcement (citation evidence). The research framework specifically

includes four core steps, as shown in Fig. 2.

Firstly, in the data construction part, we collected the three major conference papers on NLP from 2000

to 2022. By parsing the PDF of the paper and manually annotating it, key fields such as full text, title, abstract,

authors, institution information, and year of publication were extracted from the paper.

Subsequently, in the entity and semantic part. As pointed out by Hofstadter and Sander (2013), concepts

and their derived conceptual spaces constitute the underlying architecture of human thinking and

communication. In addition, knowledge entities serve as the basic unit of knowledge in the literature (Ding

et al., 2013). The phenomenon of increased similarity in academia-industry knowledge can be reflected in

the overlapping of knowledge elements and intertwining in the conceptual space.

Specifically, we fine-tuned the SciBERT model based on a locally annotated corpus to extract four

categories of entities, namely Method, Tool, Metric, and Dataset, with examples presented in Table A1. We

constructed entity bag-of-words vectors according to year and institution type, and quantified the degree of

overlap of knowledge elements using the cosine similarity metric. The complex network approach is further

utilized to reveal the dynamic transfer of knowledge dominance in the domain. At the semantic layer, we

employed SimCSE unsupervised comparative learning to semantically vectorize text spliced from titles and


## abstracts. The semantic distance across institution paper pairs is quantified by cosine similarity, the degree


of semantic convergence is measured, and technological changes across time stages are tracked.

Finally, for the knowledge flow dimension, based on the bibliometrics perspective, we use citations

between papers to measure knowledge flow and reveal knowledge contributions (Lyu et al., 2022). We

collected the references of the articles retrieved through OpenAlex2 and analyzed the trends of citation

frequency over time. The dynamic association between changes in knowledge proximity and citations, and

2 https://openalex.org/

11



the factors that may influence the changes in the distribution of academia-industry citations were explored.

Fig. 2. Framework of the knowledge proximity between industry and academia

3.1 Field of study

The 2024 Nobel Prize in Physics 3  was awarded to John J. Hopfield and Geoffrey E. Hinton,

underscoring the pivotal role of neural networks in computational neuroscience and AI. As one of the fastest-

growing segments of current AI, NLP has surged from theoretical exploration to industrial application over

the past decade, marked by multiple technological paradigm shifts (Dosi, 1982; Kuhn, 1962). In particular,

the launch of ChatGPT by OpenAI on November 30, 2022, marked a breakthrough in NLP technology,

pushing NLP to the forefront of technology and the public’s vision.

As shown in Fig. 3, NLP has evolved from academic foundations to industrial applications over the

decades. Hopfield network (Hopfield, 1982) and the BP algorithm (Rumelhart et al., 1986) laid the foundation

for modern neural network research. Subsequent iterations led to the emergence of Recurrent Neural

Networks (RNN) (Elman, 1990) and Long Short-Term Memory Networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter &

Schmidhuber, 1997), which provided a crucial theoretical framework for capturing contextual information in

sequential data. The Transformer architecture based on self-attention mechanisms in the industry opened up

3 https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2024/summary/

12



a new paradigm for NLP tasks, spawning a revolution in the pre-training paradigm (Vaswani et al., 2017).

Fig. 3. Timeline of ChatGPT Technology Development

The industry and academia in NLP show a triple convergence feature: First, on the strategy of intellectual

property rights, while OpenAI consolidates its technological advantages through patents and trade secrets,

Meta employs an open source strategy (Apache 2.0 open source protocol) to attract global developers to

optimize LLaMa models and drive benchmarking. This open strategy forces companies such as OpenAI to

innovate continuously to maintain a voice in the upper reaches of the innovation chain (Larivière et al., 2018),

presenting a dynamic game. Second, the mutual mobility of talents (Jiang et al., 2024) fosters cross-domain

tacit knowledge transfer, with industry engineering experience reversely driving basic theoretical research.

Third, the interpenetration of research paradigms, the pre-training infrastructure built by the industry (e.g.,

Google’s TPUs and Google Cloud) has become a “digital laboratory” for academic research. AI frameworks

like TensorFlow and PyTorch significantly reduce the cost of scientific research. Theories such as adversarial

training proposed by academics in turn improve the robustness of industrial models.

In view of the above analysis, NLP is a typical field for analyzing the co-evolution between academia

and industry. It can enable us to deeply investigate the characteristics of the proximity between academia and

industry at the level of fine-grained knowledge.

3.2 Data collection and pre-processing

Fig. 4.  Annual number of papers published at the three conferences.

13



This study uses full-text papers from the ACL Anthology website4 as the original dataset, and three

major conferences, ACL (Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics), EMNLP

(Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing), and NAACL (North American Chapter

of the Association for Computational Linguistics). The full-text data of 17,783 papers were collected from

2000 to 2022. Fig. 4 shows the number of papers per year for the different conferences, with a general

increasing trend. ACL and EMNLP conferences are held annually, while NAACL is not. As the most

prestigious conferences in NLP, they not only represent the top level in the field, but also reflect the latest

research developments.

3.2.1 Entity annotation

NLP is a methodology and data-driven in nature, and most research involves key elements: building or

selecting datasets for model training and validation, selecting evaluation metrics to assess model performance

and task quality, and utilizing NLP tools (Pramanick et al., 2023; Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024).

Therefore, we annotated four scientific entities, Method, Tool, Metric, and Dataset, which serve as

critical components of the research, clearly reflecting the technological approaches employed in the studies.

Among them, the four entities do not overlap with each other. In this study, we randomly selected 50 papers

from 17,783 papers and annotated 2,815 sentences containing entities as the annotated corpus, while the

remaining papers were used as the full text dataset for extraction. Compared to the SciERC (Luan et al., 2018)

and TDM (Hou et al., 2021), containing 2687 and 2010 sentences respectively, the text we annotated is

relatively adequate.

The annotation was conducted by five NLP researchers. Under the guidance of a professor in the NLP

field. Initially, two annotators pre-annotated the full text of 14 papers. The professor then supervised the

resolution of annotation conflicts and the refinement of guidelines. The remaining 36 papers were then

annotated by the other three annotators according to these guidelines. To ensure quality, the 36 papers were

2 ), with each team

divided into three groups of 12, and the annotators were paired into three teams (𝐶3

responsible for one group. This arrangement ensured that each paper received annotations from two

annotators, facilitating consistency checks. The Cohen’s Kappa values between the annotators were 0.90,

0.91, and 0.83, reflecting a strong consistency level. Thus, the annotated dataset is considered reliable for

training the entity recognition model.

4 https://aclanthology.org/

14



3.2.2 Technology-related entities recognize and normalize

In this section, we trained the NER model using the locally annotated corpus and employed the best-

performing model to infer scientific entities in the remaining papers. We then used hierarchical clustering to

normalize the entities, eliminating ambiguities. This normalization provides a more accurate and reliable data

source for subsequent experiments.

(1) Training and inference of NER models

With the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs), their usage in information extraction tasks

for scientific texts has surged. However, their performance in specialized domain tasks still lags behind

dedicated NER and RE models (Yang et al., 2024). Thus, we continue to utilize pre-trained models for NER

tasks. Specifically, we developed a model for identifying scientific entities in papers based on Zhang et al.

(2024), leveraging SciBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019)and a cascading binary tagging framework, along with data

augmentation techniques.

The model extracts annotated entities from the training set and unannotated abstracts, matching

sentences containing these entities as candidate samples. Using the partially trained model, we identify

entities in the candidate samples; if all matched entities are recognized, we retain that sentence for data

augmentation. This process enhances the diversity of training samples and improves the model’s performance.

The specific data augmentation steps are as follows:

We first construct the set of entities ℰ by setting the original labeled training set to be 𝒟labeled  =

𝑁 , where 𝑥𝑖 is the input text and 𝑦𝑖 is the sequence of entity labels; the set of unlabeled

{(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖)}𝑖=1

𝑀. Extract all entities from 𝒟labeled to form the set, where 𝑠𝑗


## abstracts of the paper is 𝒟unlabeled = {𝑠𝑗}𝑗=1


is the summary text.

𝐾



(1)

ℰ= {𝑒𝑘= (position𝑘, type𝑘) ∣∀(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖) ∈𝒟labeled, 𝑒𝑘∈𝑦𝑖}𝑘=1

Where position𝑘 denotes the position of the entity in the text and type𝑘 is the entity type.

We then perform candidate sample generation by extracting all sentences containing at least one entity

𝑒𝑘∈ℰ for each unlabeled summary 𝑠𝑗∈𝒟unlabeled to generate a candidate set 𝒞.

𝑃



(2)

𝒞= {𝑐𝑗⊆𝑠𝑗∣∃𝑒𝑘∈ℰ, position(𝑒𝑘) ⊆𝑐𝑗}𝑗=1

Finally, we use pseudo-labeling for verification.

𝒞aug = 𝑐𝑗∈𝒞∣∀𝑒∈Entities(𝑐𝑗),𝑒∈𝑦̃𝑗

(3)

Prediction of candidate samples 𝑐𝑗∈𝒞 using the pre-trained entity recognition model 𝑓𝜃  to obtain

pseudo-labels 𝑦̃𝑗. Samples that satisfy the strict coverage condition are retained, and Entities(𝑐𝑗) are all

15



the entities in the 𝑐𝑗 that are matched by the 𝒟labeled matched entities. To obtain the augmented sample

𝒞aug.

In this way, 300 sentences were obtained through data augmentation, and all 3,115 (2,815 + 300)

sentences were split into a training set (Trainset), a validation set (Validset), and a testing set (Testset) using

an 8:1:1 ratio. Examining the results of model training through Testset ensures the generalization ability of

the model without overfitting it.

Fig. 5. Comparison of different models on our annotated dataset.

Fig. 5 shows the Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1 performance of different NER models on the

annotated local dataset. The cascading SciBERT+BiLSTM model achieved a F1  score of 86.49,

outperforming the baseline model. With data augmentation, the F1 score improved to 87.00. We selected

the best-performing model for subsequent inference, extracting a total of 534,500 entities from all papers.

(2) Hierarchical clustering-based entity normalization

In the entity normalization process, abbreviations were replaced with full forms, and broad or low-

contribution terms, such as “model” and “natural language processing,” were removed. Referring to the


## method of Zhang et al. (2024), we then performed entity clustering based on edit distance: entities with an


edit distance greater than 0.95 were classified into the same cluster, while clusters were merged if their

average similarity exceeded 0.8. After normalization, 268,392 entities were obtained. We then filtered out

entities with an annual frequency of less than five, considering them as potential misidentifications, and

ultimately retained 37,448 valid technology-related entities.

3.2.3 Semantic embedding of ACL Anthology papers

To assess the semantic similarity between academic and industrial papers, we excluded papers that

did not have abstracts in our dataset of 17,783 papers. The final sample size selected was 17,754 papers,

16



of which 13,225 were academic and industry papers.

For text embedding representation, we employed SimCSE5 to generate embeddings (Gao et al., 2021).

Given that our task involves measuring sentence-level similarity and considering the characteristics of the


## data (which lacks inherent semantic labels) as well as model performance, we adopted an unsupervised


approach. SimCSE improves embedding quality through self-supervised learning and outperforms other

models on several Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) datasets.

We perform sentence embedding using contrastive learning by concatenating the title and abstract of

each paper into a single text, which is then fed into the model twice. By leveraging the randomness of the

dropout layer, we obtain two different embeddings for each sentence. In each batch, the two different

outputs of the same sentence are treated as positive examples, while the outputs of other sentences are

treated as negative examples. The loss function is:

′

𝑧𝑖

𝑧𝑖,𝐡𝑖

sin(𝐡𝑖

)

ℓ𝑖= −log

𝑒

𝜏

(4)

′

𝑧𝑗

𝑧𝑖,𝐡𝑗

sin(𝐡𝑖

)

∑



𝑁

𝑗=1 𝑒

𝜏

𝑧= 𝑓𝜃(𝑥𝑖,𝑧)

(5)

𝐡𝑖

Where 𝑓𝜃  is the encoder function, 𝑧  is the random mask of dropout, and 𝜏  is the temperature

coefficient, which is used as a temperature coefficient to regulate the shape of the probability distribution in

the vector space, and 𝜏 is set to be 0.01 in this experiment. A lower 𝜏 makes the semantic vector probability

distribution of the text distributed in the space more steeply, and makes the model to increase the distance

between positive and negative samples (Gao et al., 2021; Wang & Liu, 2021). In the unsupervised task

scenario of this study, a strict distribution of positive and negative samples helps to provide more

discriminative embedding vectors for the subsequent semantic similarity computation task.

We embedded paper titles and abstracts using our fine-tuned sup-simcse-bert6 model.

3.2.4 Division of types of publishing institutions

Chen et al. (2024) determined the author’s institutional type by manually annotating institutional

information and integrating the Global Research Identification Database(GRID)7 database. Based on the

5 https://github.com/princeton-nlp/SimCSE

6 https://huggingface.co/princeton-nlp/sup-simcse-bert-base-uncased

7 The Global Research Identification Database (GRID) classifies institution types into eight categories: government,

education, company, facility, healthcare, nonprofit, archive and other.

17



institutional information they had already obtained, this study further supplemented the institutional data of

the papers by combining manual annotation with OpenAlex queries for the entries in the dataset used in the

research that had not yet obtained institutional information. It should be noted that OpenAlex institutional

classification criteria are consistent with the GRID classification standards, still based on the Research

Organization Registry (ROR)8 system. After GRID became an integrated part of Dimensions, ROR became

the continuation of GRID. The system assigns a unique organization identifier (ROR ID), to each institution.

Ultimately, we completed the author and corresponding institutional information for 17,783 papers.

Table 3 Distribution of types of institutions

Institution_Type

Frequency

Ratio

Education

49672

69.91%

Company

14063

19.79%

Facility

3776

5.31%

Nonprofit

1966

2.77%

Government

902

1.27%

Healthcare

320

0.45%

Other

296

0.42%

Archive

51

0.07%

Total

71,046

100.0%

Given the research objective of this paper, which is the proximity of knowledge between academia and

industry, we focus our attention on academic and industrial institutions. First, we classify education and

company institutions into academia and industry, respectively. Following the definitions from existing studies

(Chen, Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2022), healthcare institutions primarily include research-oriented

medical institutions and government-funded research centers (e.g., Harvard Medical School, Mayo Clinic).

Thus, we categorized education and healthcare into the academia category and company into the industry

category. The final distribution of institution types is shown in Table 3, where academic and industry

institutions together comprise 90.15% of the dataset, while other types of institutions are excluded (less than

10% of the total). In addition, when dealing with the complexity of having multiple institutions as authors,

we follow Hottenrott et al. (2021) and consider the first institution listed by the authors as their primary

affiliation.

For paper type classification, a paper is classified as: (a) “Academic” if all authors are affiliated with

academic institutions; (b) “Industry” if all authors are affiliated with industry institutions; (c) “Academic-

8 https://ror.org/

18



Industry cooperation” (hereinafter referred to as cooperation papers) if both academic and industry

institutions are represented among its authors.

Fig. 6. Distribution of publications by different types of institutions

Fig. 6 illustrates the annual publication proportions of different institutions for the 17,783 papers.

Additionally, we divided 2000–2022 into three periods following NLP field development (Zhou et al., 2020).

3.3 Knowledge proximity measurement based on knowledge entities and

semantic space

In this section, we build fine-grained knowledge proximity metrics to address RQ1

3.3.1 Knowledge entity similarity analysis

Utilizing the entities identified in Section 3.2.2, we used a bag-of-words model to represent these entities

as two separate sequences for each year. After alignment, we generated the corresponding bag-of-words

vectors. By calculating the cosine similarity between these vectors, we assessed the similarity of entities

across different years, resulting in a similarity matrix.

The similarity matrix provides an intuitive way to assess the knowledge proximity between industrial

and academic research in a given year. This approach accounts not only for the presence of different entities

but also incorporates their frequencies.

For example, when calculating the similarity between industrial research in year1 and academic research

in year2 (where year1 and year2 may be the same), we define the vocabulary of the bag-of-words model

using the union of the entities |𝑽| . 𝑁 represents the total number of entities from both industrial and

academic sectors, which is the size of the union |𝑽|.

𝑩𝒐𝒘𝒊𝒚= ⟨𝐹𝑖𝑦(𝑒0), 𝐹𝑖𝑦(𝑒1),… , 𝐹𝑖𝑦(𝑒𝑁−1)⟩,𝑒0, 𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝑁−1 ∈|𝑉𝑖|, 𝑖∈{0,1}

(6)

19



Here, 𝐵𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑦 represents the bag-of-words vector for either the industrial or academic sector in year 𝑦,

where 𝑖= 0  denotes the industrial sector and 𝑖= 1  denotes the academic sector. 𝐹𝑖𝑦  represents the

frequency of the entity’s occurrence in year 𝑦 for sector 𝑖.

𝐹𝑖𝑦(𝑒𝑗) = {𝑞,    𝑒𝑗∈|𝑉𝑖|

0,     𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒

(7)

Cosine similarity was used to calculate the similarity of entity series in academia and industry in

different years.

𝑁−1

𝐹0𝑦1(𝑒𝑘)𝐹1𝑦2(𝑒𝑘)

Sim(𝑦1, 𝑦2) = 𝐶𝑜𝑠(𝑩𝒐𝒘𝟎𝒚𝟏⋅𝑩𝒐𝒘𝒊𝒚𝟐) =

𝑩𝒐𝒘𝟎𝒚𝟏⋅𝑩𝒐𝒘𝒊𝒚𝟐

‖𝑩𝒐𝒘𝟎𝒚𝟏‖2 ⋅‖𝑩𝒐𝒘𝒊𝒚𝟐‖2

(8)

= ∑

𝑍0𝑦1𝑍1𝑦2

𝑘=0

where 𝑍𝑖𝑦= √∑



𝑁−1

𝑘=0 𝐹𝑖𝑦(𝑒𝑘)2, and 𝑁 represents the dimension of the vector.

3.3.2 Convergence of semantic space

Using the contrastive learning method from Section 3.2.3, we generated a vector representation for each

paper and calculated the cosine similarity between all pairs of academic and industrial papers.

ℎ𝑧𝑖⋅ℎ𝑧𝑗

∥ℎ𝑧𝑖∥∥ℎ𝑧𝑗∥

(9)

𝑠(𝑝𝑖,𝑝𝑗) =

ℎ𝑧𝑖⋅ℎ𝑧𝑗

∥ℎ𝑧𝑖∥∥ℎ𝑧𝑗∥ , where ℎ𝑧𝑖= 𝑓𝜃(𝑥𝑖, 𝑧),ℎ𝑧𝑗= 𝑓𝜃(𝑥𝑗,𝑧) . The similarity between the vectors is

𝑠(𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗) =

calculated by cosine similarity, where 𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗 are the two papers to be compared, 𝑧 is the random dropout,

𝑥𝑖 is the text, 𝑓𝜃 is the model encoder.

In calculating the similarity between different years, we adopted the concept of nearest neighbors.

However, considering the inconsistency in publication volumes across different years, this study utilizes a

threshold as a substitute. Specifically, we measure the threshold by comparing each paper with its counterpart

from the opposing institution.

(𝑦1,𝑦2,𝐿) = 𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒({ 𝑠(𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗) ∣∣𝑝𝑖∈𝒟𝑦1

𝐿,𝑝𝑗∈𝒟𝑦2

1−𝐿}, 0.9)

(10)

𝑠(𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗) = 𝑄0.9

𝐿 represents the set of all papers of institution type 𝐿 of institution type in year 𝑦 , 𝑠

Where, 𝒟𝑦

represents the semantic vector cosine similarity between the focal paper 𝑝𝑖  and the paper 𝑝𝑗  of the

opposing institution.

In this formula, 𝐿= 0 represents the industrial sector, while 𝐿= 1 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 the academic sector.

Subsequently, we compute a set of similarity values by comparing each paper with all publications from the

opposing sector for the target year and compare the 90th percentile (top 10%) of these values against the

threshold, which is referenced from existing literature (An et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024;

20



Mukherjee et al., 2017). Then, we calculated the overall paper similarities and analyzed their distribution

(Fig. 7). Based on this distribution, the 90th percentile of the overall similarity score was 0.736, which was

set as the high similarity threshold.

𝐿,𝑝𝑗∈𝒟𝑦2

1−𝐿,𝑠(𝑝𝑖,𝑝𝑗) > 0.736 }|

𝑃(𝑦1, 𝑦2, 𝐿) = |{ 𝑠(𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗) ∣∣𝑝𝑖∈𝒟𝑦1

𝐿|



(11)

|𝒟𝑦1

We regard the proportion 𝑃 of high similarity as the similarity between industry and academia in

different years. The numerator represents the number of paper pairs that satisfy 𝑠(𝑝𝑖,𝑝𝑗) > 0.736 . The

𝐿| is number of institution papers.

denominator |𝒟𝑦1

Fig. 7. Probability distribution of cosine similarity for papers in the dataset

Specifically, using 2018 industrial papers and 2019 academic papers as an example, we first calculate

the similarity between each 2018 industrial paper and every 2019 academic paper. For each 2018 paper, we

construct a set of similarity values and extract the 90th percentile as its similarity score with 2019. Based on

this, we set 0.736 as the high similarity threshold and compute the proportion of 2018 industrial papers with

a similarity score above 0.736. This proportion quantifies the similarity of 2018 industrial research to 2019

academic research.

3.3.3 Knowledge entity co-occurrence network analysis

According to Barabasi and Albert’s (1999) complex network theory, highly influential nodes attract

more new nodes. With the continuous evolution and transformation of technological paradigms, new entities

continue to emerge in the NLP field (Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024). During the process where paradigm shifts

drive the reconfiguration and renewal of knowledge systems, such changes are intuitively reflected in the

topological characteristics of the network.

Using each year as a time unit, we treated entities mentioned in papers as connected to build an entity

co-occurrence network. We calculated the largest connected component (LCC) for different institutions,

21



representing highly related entities and their relationships (Luo et al., 2023). Analyzing the LCC reveals key

components and major linkage paths in the knowledge network structure. We constructed the connected

component of the entire field based on all entities. Furthermore, we separately removed publications from

three types of institutions to study the missing scale of the giant connected component, to measure the control

strength and influence of different types of institutions on the overall knowledge network structure, and to

analyze the sensitivity of the network structure.

Further, this study focuses on the common nodes in the LCC of the three types of institutions, analyzed

in terms of the technology portfolio patterns as well as the contribution to knowledge connectivity:

𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛= 𝑉𝐴∩𝑉𝐼∩𝑉𝐶

(12)

where 𝑉𝐴,𝑉𝐼, 𝑉𝐶 represent the set of nodes in the subgraphs of academia, industry and cooperation, and

𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛 is the common node between the three.

′ = (𝑢, 𝑣) ∣(𝑢, 𝑣) ∈𝐸𝑇 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑢∈𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑣∈𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛

(13)

𝐸𝑇

′  represents the set of concatenated edges that exist in the public node for the type 𝑇.

𝐸𝑇

Additionally, this study was based on the Louvain algorithm (Blondel et al., 2008) for modularization

calculations and community structure analysis. By calculating the network’s modularity (Modularity), this

indicator quantifies the difference between the connection density within communities and the sparsity of

connections between communities, effectively assessing the cohesiveness and separation of community

structures in the network.

[𝑊𝑖𝑗−𝑘𝑖𝑘𝑗

𝑄= 1

2𝑚] 𝛿(𝑐𝑖, 𝑐𝑗)

(14)

2𝑚∑

𝑖,𝑗

Where 𝑄 is the modularity, 𝑚 denotes the number of edges in the network, 𝛿(𝑐𝑖, 𝑐𝑗) takes 1 when 𝑖

and 𝑗 belong to the same community (and 0 otherwise), 𝑘𝑖 represents the degree of node 𝑖 , 𝑊𝑖𝑗 is the

adjacency matrix of the network. High modularity indicates strong intra-community connectivity and barriers

between communities, while a low modularity degree reflects strong knowledge circulation between

communities.

3.4 Citation trends analysis

3.4.1 Retrieval of references and their institutional information

The process of citation between scientific publications can be abstracted as an explicit characterization

of knowledge flow (Tsay, 2015). Measuring citations between publications is a common approach to

22



knowledge flow (Lyu et al., 2022). At the knowledge flow level, we queried references in 17,783 papers

through OpenAlex and typed the affiliations of authors.

In the case of missing institution types in OpenAlex (Zhang, Cao, et al., 2024), i.e., for some of the

queries, OpenAlex returns null institutions (Completely missing institutional information). We use the

author’s ID to run a subsequent query and retrieve all institutional affiliations, matching by publication year

and the author’s institutional tenure. Through the above steps, we added some papers with missing institutions.

This is consistent with the strategy of (Zhang, Cao, et al., 2024) in missing information processing.

In the end, we obtained a total of 479,923 references. And for those cited papers that appeared multiple

times in our data, we supplemented their institution information type by searching again manually. In the end,

we obtained 466,856 papers containing institution information.

By counting the frequency of occurrence of these eight categories (including multiple occurrences of

the same institution), the statistical results are shown in Table 4. Among the 8 categories, “education”

accounts for the largest proportion at 67%. Consistent with the research category classification criteria

described earlier (Chen, Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2022), we classified “education” and

“healthcare” as academic institutions, and “company” as industrial institutions. The cumulative frequency of

“education”, “healthcare”, and “Company” reached 87.29%, while the remaining categories had lower

proportions and were collectively excluded.

The criteria for determining paper types also align with previous definitions: papers where all authors

are affiliated with academic institutions are classified as “academic papers”; those with all authors from

industrial institutions are “industrial papers”; and papers with authors from both academia and industry are

cooperative.

Table 4 Cumulative frequency proportions of different institutions in the references

Institution_Type

Frequency

Ratio

education

1137566

67.05%

company

309657

18.25%

facility

112446

6.63%

nonprofit

55554

3.27%

government

34437

2.03%

healthcare

33687

1.99%

other

11373

0.67%

archive

1948

0.11%

Total

1696668

100.0%

23



3.4.2 Analysis of citation distribution characteristics

Further, we measure the citation characteristics of both academia and industry in the field of NLP, and

we explore the tendency of industry and academia to cross-cite and self-cite using the excess self-citations

(ECC) model, with specific reference to (Liang et al., 2024).

𝐸𝐶𝐶𝑡(𝐿𝑖) = [𝑃( 𝐿𝑖∣∣𝐿𝑖, 𝑡≤𝑡𝑝) −𝑃( 𝐿𝑖∣∣𝑡≤𝑡𝑝)] −[𝑃( 𝐿𝑗∣∣𝐿𝑖, 𝑡≤𝑡𝑝) −𝑃( 𝐿𝑗∣∣𝑡≤𝑡𝑝)]

(15)

Where 𝐿= 0 represents industry, and 𝐿= 1 represents academia, 𝐸𝐶𝐶𝑡(𝐿𝑖) denotes the degree of

excessive self-citation in papers published by institution type 𝑖. 𝐿𝑖 and 𝐿𝑗 refer to different institutions,

meaning 𝐿𝑖= 𝐿𝑗 ⊕1. 𝑡𝑝 represents the publication time of the paper, and 𝑃( 𝛼∣∣𝛽, 𝑡≤𝑡𝑝) indicates the

probability of institution type 𝛽  citing papers from institution type 𝛼 . 𝑃( 𝛼∣∣𝑡≤𝑡𝑝)  represents the

probability of any paper citing those from institution type 𝛼, without specifying the institution type.

We also measured the citation distribution uniformity for each year to understand citation exchanges

between academia and industry. Specifically, we used the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) to assess the

concentration of citation distribution. The HHI is a standard metric for measuring concentration.

2

2

HHI = ∑( 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝐿𝑖)

(16)

𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝐿𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙))

𝑖=0

Where 𝐿= 2 represents collaboration. 𝐶𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝐿𝑖) refers to the number of citations from

institution type 𝑖. A higher HHI value indicates greater concentration, while a lower value suggests more

balanced citation contributions, reflecting bidirectional knowledge flow between academia and industry.

When we analyzed the correlation between citation distribution and knowledge proximity. We first

conducted an overall analysis by calculating the annual mean HHI index of paper citation distribution and

comparing it with the corresponding annual entity similarity.

Subsequently, at the semantic level, we utilized a multiple regression model based on a single paper as

the unit of analysis. The semantic similarity between each paper and its opposing institution type is set as the

dependent variable, and the HHI of its citation distribution is set as the independent variable. Specifically,

for a paper 𝑝𝑖 published in year 𝑦, its semantic similarity is defined as the top 90th percentile of semantic

1−𝐿 in its opposing institution. The calculation method is consistent with Eq. (13),

similarity to 𝑝𝑗∈𝒟𝑦

limiting the analysis to papers of the same year only, as follows:

𝐿,𝑝𝑗∈𝒟𝑦

1−𝐿}, 0.9)

(17)

SemSim𝑖= 𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒({ 𝑠(𝑝𝑖,𝑝𝑗) ∣∣𝑝𝑖∈𝒟𝑦

Regarding the setting of control variables, research team-level characteristics have an important impact.

Large R&D teams tend to have a broader and richer knowledge base, and collaboration among team members

24



can increase opportunities for cross-domain knowledge integration (Wu et al., 2025). At the same time, such

teams will focus on current hot areas and cutting-edge results on which to conduct development research

(Wu et al., 2019), so we include the number of authors and institutions as control variables. In addition, we

measure the flow of knowledge using the citation distribution feature, which affects the calculation of the

indicator HHI, and we also consider the number of citations as a control variable. Also referring to (Wu et

al., 2025), we applied a logarithmic transformation for continuous control variables to deal with their skewed

distributions.

Finally, taking into account the differences between disclosure mechanisms and institutions (Gans et al.,

2017), we also control for the fixed effects of institution type to distinguish between institutional

characteristics of different subjects. The specific regression model is as follows:

SemSim𝑖= 𝛼+ 𝛽1HHI𝑖+ 𝛽2ln(InstNum)𝑖+ 𝛽3𝑙𝑛(AuthNum)𝑖+ 𝛽4ln(Ref)𝑖

(18)

2022

1

𝛾𝜏⋅𝐷𝜏+ 𝜀𝑖

+ ∑

𝛿𝑘⋅𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑘+

∑

𝑘=0

𝜏=2000

Where 𝐷𝜏 is a year dummy variable to absorb time trends. 𝑖 denotes a single paper and 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is a

randomized perturbation term. 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑘 represents the institution type, with 𝑘= 0,1  corresponding to

industry and academia, respectively.

4 Results

In this section, we answer the three research questions mentioned in the introduction, based on the results

obtained from text mining and citation analysis in Chapter 3.

4.1 Research content proximity between industry and academia

From the two analytical dimensions of entity similarity and semantic similarity, this section examines

the changing characteristics of research content similarity between industry and academia, thereby addressing

research question RQ2.

4.1.1 Changes in knowledge entities’ similarity within ACL Anthology papers

In this article, scientific entities were extracted from the full text and categorized by year and institution.

Based on this, bag-of-words vectors were constructed as described in equation (11), and the cosine similarity

between these vectors was calculated to quantify the proximity between academia and industry.

By measuring the cosine similarity of bag-of-words vectors for entities from 2000 to 2022, we generated

the heatmap. Fig. 8 (a) displays results based on all entities, while Fig. 8 (b) focuses exclusively on method

25



entities. Isolating method entities makes sense because they specifically represent the research approaches,

techniques, and models employed.

We observe a generally gradual upward trend in entity similarity between industry and academia. Before

2014, the similarity formed a near-rectangular pattern, indicating stable technological trends and a high

degree of alignment between the two sectors, reflecting the relative stability of the technological paradigm

during this period. Despite the initial development of deep learning technology, it has not yet had a significant

impact on the established research paradigm, and progressive innovation in the technological field was still

constrained by the original research paradigm.

Since 2018, the trajectory of the heat map Fig. 8 shows a clear shift, one of which is the rapid rise in

similarity, breaking the smooth growth pattern of the previous period, with the level of similarity

improvement significantly surpassing the previous period. Secondly, the similarity maintenance cycle is

significantly narrowed, reflecting a clear difference with the traditional technology evolutionary rhythm, and

research content spaced only three years apart shows significant similarity decay. This coincides with the

period of the pre-training paradigm brought about by the emergence of the Transformer architecture, BERT

and GPT, among others (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford & Narasimhan, 2018; Vaswani et al., 2017), reflecting

the discontinuous nature of the scientific revolution in this paradigm (Dosi, 1982; Kuhn, 1962).

Furthermore, we analyzed the dynamic differences in knowledge proximity between academia and

industry from the perspectives of three entity types: Tools, Datasets, and Metrics. The results are shown in

Fig. B1. Tools and Datasets exhibit stage-driven similarity growth patterns. Tool entities’ similarity increases

highly synchronized with technological paradigm shifts. Datasets show high similarity in consecutive years

but exhibit noticeable fluctuations across different years, reflecting the dynamic adaptation between dataset

iterations and technological demands. The sustained high similarity among metric entities stems from

standardization. A unified evaluation framework provides directly comparable and verifiable benchmarks,

fostering institutional research collaboration while ensuring alignment between industry and academia in

technological evolution (Aufrant, 2022).

26



Fig. 8. Heatmap of bag-of-words vector similarity for entities. (a) The heatmap of bag-of-words vector

similarity is based on all entities; (b) The heatmap of bag-of-words vector similarity is based on the


## method entities.


Notes. The black dotted box in the lower right corner represents the pre-training paradigm stage after 2018,

which is the brightest area in the heat map

Further, we analyzed traditional macro-level indicators of academia-industry proximity, as measured by

the frequency of collaboration in publications (Blankenberg & Buenstorf, 2016; Fischer et al., 2019). The

trend of similarity based on the level of the knowledge entity is consistent with the percentage of collaborative

papers, as reflected in Fig. 9. Both in terms of collaboration frequency and knowledge proximity gradually

increase over time, reaching the highest level in the entire observation cycle during the pre-training phase.

Fig. 9. Trends in entity knowledge proximity and proportion of collaborative papers (2000 - 2022)

To further verify the reliability and stability of the similarity index based on knowledge entities, the

Coefficient of Variation (CV) test was used (see Fig. C1). A smaller CV means the index has smaller

fluctuations in measurement results under different sampling conditions, effectively avoiding biases from

random sampling. Compared with traditional macro indicators, the indicators based on knowledge entities

maintain a smaller CV in different sampling scenarios. This not only confirms the greater stability and

27



reliability of fine-grained measurement method, but also verifies its significant stability advantage over

traditional macro-indicators.

4.1.2 Semantic proximity and new opportunities brought by technological innovations

Building on the overall perspective of entity measurements between institutions, we further calculated

the similarity between each academic or industrial paper and papers from the counterpart institutional type

at the individual paper level. By setting a threshold, we computed the proportion of highly similar papers to

describe the overall similarity between the two types of institutions.

Compared to entity-based sequence comparisons, semantic analysis takes context and multi-level

semantic relationships into account, making the results of semantic similarity calculations generally more

complex. Fig. 10 (a) and Fig. 10 (b) show a similar trend with entity similarity, with higher similarity values

in the lower right region. To ensure the robustness of the results, we also supplemented the experiments at

the 5% and 20% thresholds (see Fig. B2).

Especially when calculating the similarity of industry papers relative to academia, the similarity value

is more pronounced than the similarity of academic papers to industry. This may be attributed to the larger

number of academic papers, resulting in higher similarity when industry searches for academic articles.

Additionally, the broader research directions in academia allow industry papers from various fields to be

more easily comparable.

Based on the vertical analysis of Fig. 10 (a) and the horizontal analysis of Fig. 10 (b), we observe

significant highlighted areas in academia around 2009 and 2014. A similar phenomenon is noted around 2018;

however, the impact of frequent technological iterations results in less pronounced similarity compared to

2009 and 2014. These studies demonstrate a high degree of similarity over an extended time frame, with

research content building on previous work, particularly in close relation to studies from earlier years. Within

the context of NLP development, these years also represent critical technological turning points and

differentiation phases.

28



Fig. 10. Heatmap of semantic similarity. (a) The heatmap of similarity from academia searching for

industry papers; (b) The heatmap of similarity from industry searching for academic papers.

Notes. The black dotted box in the lower right corner represents the pre-training paradigm stage after 2018,

which is the brightest area in the heat map

Historically, IBM initiated machine translation research at the end of the last century, with its 1993

word-aligned translation model (Brown et al., 1993) marking the birth of statistical machine translation

(SMT). Google officially launched the Beta version of Google Translate on April 28, 2006, which made

statistical machine translation more accessible to more people. This trajectory exemplifies how technological

innovations consistently offer new solutions to long-standing problems, particularly evident in machine

translation. Around 2009, statistical methods and feature engineering remained dominant in NLP research.

However, with the rise of deep learning (Bahdanau et al., 2016; Mikolov et al., 2013), especially after 2014,


## methods based on RNN proposed by academics gradually replaced traditional statistical models


(Sundermeyer et al., 2014). This shift is not only an improvement in model performance but also greatly

simplifies the complexity of feature engineering, enabling researchers to learn effective feature

representations directly from raw data. These advancements propelled the field to higher levels and laid the

foundation for the subsequent paradigm of self-attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017).

In addition, based on high similarity paper pairs, we matched the most relevant industry papers from

previous years for each target academic paper, using 2009 and 2014 academic papers as the baseline reference,

and generated word clouds as shown in Fig. 11. The high similarity topics are mainly centered around

machine translation, and secondary topics include supervised learning and entity recognition. These word

clouds characterize the closest early industrial research aligning with subsequent academic work, revealing

new development opportunities that statistical machine learning and deep learning have generated for

machine translation during technological advancement.

29



Fig. 11. Word cloud of industry papers identified as similar to 2009 and 2014 academic papers. (a) Word

cloud of industry papers before 2009; (b) Word cloud of industry papers before 2014.

The research results not only reflect the pulling effect of industrial demand on the direction of academic

research (Hoppmann, 2021), but also demonstrate the feedback that academic research brings to the practical

problems of the industry, providing targeted solutions to industrial practice through theoretical innovation

(Paniccia et al., 2025; Song & Wei, 2024). The resource advantages of the industry and the rich theories of

academia form a synergy and jointly promote the development of the field.

4.2 Structural evolution of knowledge entity co-occurrence networks

In this section, we analyze the largest connected component, overlapping regions and modularity to

understand the structure of knowledge networks in NLP.

4.2.1 The dominance of the knowledge network structure in academia gradually declines

We calculated the size and missing parts of the largest connected component from 2000 to 2022, as

shown in Fig. 12. With the increase in publications and entities, the size of the largest component also grew

annually. This reflects the rising complexity and scale of the network, indicating continuous knowledge

development and integration in the NLP field.

In the early stages of NLP, due to limitations in technical theories, as well as restrictions in computational

resources and power, the overall size of the entity network related to the technology was relatively small.

During this period, academia dominated the knowledge network structure.

Since 2010, the rapid growth in dataset sizes, computational power (Strubell et al., 2019), and the rise

of deep learning have driven breakthroughs in NLP. These changes are reflected in the increased role of

industry and collaborations in the knowledge network structure, reducing academia’s dominance. After 2018,

with the advent of pre-trained models, the knowledge network expanded rapidly, further highlighting the

growing importance of industrial and collaborative contributions.

30



Academia’s dominance has declined, partly due to the vast computational resources required for large

models, which industry can better support. This also reflects NLP’s increasing “knowledge burden” (Jones,

2009; Schweitzer & Brendel, 2021). With an increasingly complex body of knowledge, research has become

more dependent on collaboration between academia and industry.

Furthermore, we draw the co-occurrence network of knowledge entities in different periods to visualize

the trajectory of knowledge systems with industry and academia (as shown in Fig. B3).

Fig. 12. Size of the largest connected component and the proportion of missing proportions by institution.

4.2.2 Topological characterization of knowledge entity network

We further explore the overlapping nodes of the largest connected component. Quantify the contribution

of different types of institutions to knowledge reorganization by analyzing the characteristics of the

connecting edges between public entities. The computational results are shown in Fig. 13.

We found that since the introduction of the pretrained model paradigm in 2018, the quantity of entity

combinations has shown a significant increase. Additionally, the entity combination patterns among the three

institutional types exhibited notable differences: the scale of entity linkage in academia is significantly higher

than that in industry. This indicates that academia holds a greater advantage at the technical combination

level, capable of constructing more extensive connections through common nodes in the knowledge network,

thereby playing a pivotal role in knowledge dissemination and integration. Industry, on the other hand,

consistently has the lowest portfolio size.

There are multiple mechanisms for the formation of this difference: First, the relatively low volume of

publications in the industrial sector leads to its smaller representation in technical portfolios; Secondly, the

technological innovation strategy of the industry tends to iterative optimization of existing technology rather

than pursuing extensive knowledge exploration and combination. For instance, engineers often reduce

innovation risk through module decoupling (Fleming & Sorenson, 2001). In contrast, academia, as an

31



important source of knowledge in the innovation ecosystem (Rabelo Neto et al., 2024), has an advantage in

terms of technology portfolio.

Fig. 13. Scale of edges formed between common nodes in subgraphs

Fig. 14 presents the dynamics of the modularity of the network in the period 2000 - 2022 and categorizes

it into three stages of technological development: statistical machine learning, deep learning, and pre-training.

The change in modularity degree reveals the degree of integration of internal community groups in the co-

occurring network of knowledge entities.

Fig. 14. Trend of modularity change in different subgraphs

In the statistical machine learning stage, the modularity of the industry continues to be higher than that

of the academic and cooperative institutions, and the value stays above 0.3 and shows an upward trend, which

further indicates that a strong community structure and knowledge integration tightness is maintained within

it, with limited communication between communities. This phenomenon reflects the industry’s high degree

of focus on specific applications (e.g., machine translation), leading to a path dependency and lock-in effect

in its body of knowledge (Colombelli et al., 2021). In contrast, the modularity of academia is low and remains

stable, indicating that its network structure is more open and that knowledge dissemination and integration

32



remain in a steady state.

In the deep learning era, the modularity of industry and collaborative institutions decreases significantly,

signaling that technological progress have broken through tightly knit communities within the field and

facilitating integration between different communities in the knowledge network. During the pre-training

stage, the modularity of the three types of institutions stabilized and remained at a low level.

Overall, the change in the degree of modularity reveals the characteristics of knowledge integration and

diffusion, and this change is essentially an outward manifestation of the synergistic evolution between

technological development and institutions. Technological developments drive institutions from relatively

independent communities to open and interactive network structures.

4.3 Changes in the direction of knowledge flow between industry and

academia

In this section, we address the question RQ3 by measuring the knowledge flow in the NLP field through


## references.


4.3.1 Knowledge flow becomes more bidirectional between industry and academia

We calculate the proportion of different types of citations by comparing the frequency of references

from specific institutions to the total frequency of all references. For example, to assess the knowledge inflow

from industry to academia in 2018, we measured this using the ratio of the number of times industry cited

academic articles in 2018 divided by the total number of industry citations in that year.

Fig. 15 illustrates that academic citations represent the highest proportion among all citations. Initially,

academia was the main contributor to foundational algorithms and theories in NLP. All three publication

types primarily absorbed insights from the industrial sector, with over half of the citations consistently

sourced from academia across all periods.

From 2000 to 2012, the proportion of citations from academia increased, while citations to industry

declined. This period indicated that academia was the primary knowledge source in statistical machine

learning. However, since 2013, the rise of deep learning as a data- and computation-driven AI subfield has

shifted the balance toward industry, increasing its citation proportion and a decrease in academic citations.

Although academia remains a major knowledge source, industry has significantly changed the knowledge

flow dynamics, leveraging advantages like computational power, large datasets, and skilled researchers

(Ahmed et al., 2023). Concurrently, the number of collaborative publications has risen (see Fig. 6), with

33



citation frequencies increasing rapidly (Färber & Tampakis, 2024), fostering more active cross-disciplinary

collaboration and enhancing knowledge flow.

a

b

c

Fig. 15. Different types of citations and their distribution: (a) Proportion of citations from academic papers

by different types of publishing institutions; (b) Proportion of citations from industry papers by different

types of publishing institutions; (c) Proportion of citations from cooperation papers by different types of

publishing institutions.

In 2017, the emergence of the Transformer model triggered a peak in internal citations within the

industrial sector, while the proportion of citations from industry to academia decreased, a trend that continues

to this day. Although the citation proportion from academia has declined, this does not imply a reduction in

its influence. Academic citations still dominate, with all three types of publications citing academia at rates

exceeding 50%. Overall, the proportion of knowledge flowing out of industry has gradually increased,

strengthening the bidirectional flow of knowledge in the NLP field. Notably, the influence of collaborative

publications continues to rise, accounting for approximately 30% of total citations, becoming a significant

source of knowledge.

4.3.2 Bidirectional knowledge flow correlates with increased knowledge proximity

To quantify the direction of knowledge flow and the degree of proximity between academia and industry,

thereby assessing their potential correlation, we first conducted a macro-level analysis by calculating the HHI

of annual citation distributions and compared it with the entity similarity across different years.

As shown in Fig. 16, this suggests that a more even distribution of citations facilitates greater

communication among research entities. The bidirectional flow of knowledge within the field effectively

promotes research collaboration and the dissemination of outcomes, further enhancing the alignment of

research content between academia and industry.

34



Fig. 16. Association between entity similarity and citation distribution HHI. (a) Only use the method

entity; (b) Use all entities.

To further analyze the research question, we use a multiple regression model constructed in Section

3.4.2 to examine the correlation between the concentration of citation distribution HHI and similarity for

each paper. To further reveal the impact of technological evolution on this pattern, we still build regression

models according to each of the three key phases in the NLP field (2000–2012 statistical machine learning

phase, 2013–2017 deep learning phase, and 2018–2022 pre-training model phase).

Descriptive statistics and correlation coefficients of the variables are shown in Table 5 and Fig. 17,

where the correlations between the independent variables do not indicate potential multicollinearity. For more

robust results, we performed multicollinearity tests before multiple regression. The variance inflation factor

(VIF) of all independent variables is less than 2, and the average VIF is 1.34, indicating no serious

multicollinearity. The final regression results are shown in Table 6, and the key findings are as follows.

Overall, in the base model Model (1) with only HHI and fixed effects, HHI has a significant negative

effect on semantic similarity (𝛽= −0.037, 𝑝 <  0.01) , suggesting that the more evenly distributed the

citations in a paper are (the lower the HHI), the more closely it is associated with industry or academia.

Model (2) remains significant (𝛽= −0.032,𝑝 <  0.01) after adding the control variables (logarithm of

number of institutions, authors, and references).

Subsequently, we analyzed each of the three periods. In the statistical machine learning phase (2000–

2012), HHI had a significant negative effect on semantic similarity (𝛽= −0.021,𝑝 <  0.01). However,

after adding control variables in Model (4), the coefficient of HHI continues to become smaller (𝛽=

−0.014, 𝑝 <  0.01), suggesting that the effect of the distribution of citation concentration may be partially

explained by other factors. In addition, the relatively small coefficients suggest that knowledge flow during

35



the statistical machine learning stage contributes limitedly to the improvement of knowledge proximity.

In the deep learning phase, the balanced distribution of citations enhances semantic similarity (𝛽=

−0.051，−0.045,p <  0.01) regardless of the inclusion of control variables, as shown in Model (5) and

Model (6). During the pre-training model phase, the negative effect of HHI persisted in Model (7) and Model

(8) (𝛽= −0.040，−0.043,p <  0.01) . All models include fixed effects for year and institution type,

excluding time trends and institution type. R-squared improved with controls in all cases, suggesting that

adding control variables to the model improves the goodness of fit.

Table 5 Descriptive statistics of variables (N = 13,225).

Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

SemSim

0.724

0.036

0.464

0.809

HHI

0.647

0.176

0.333

1

Institution_num

1.542

0.891

1

20

Author_num

3.408

1.861

1

37


## References


25.094

14.920

1

97

Institution type

0.895

0.307

0

1

Fig. 17. Correlation coefficient between variables

The correlation reflected in the final regression reflects the integration effect formed in the bidirectional

flow of knowledge: a uniform citation distribution implies a more balanced dissemination of knowledge

among different subjects, which promotes the fusion of knowledge systems.

36



Table 6 The association between citation distribution HHI and semantic similarity.

Overall Period

Statistical machine learning

Deep learning

Pre-training

(2018–2022)

(2000–2022)

(2000–2012)

(2013–2017)

VARIABLES

Model(1)

Model(2)



Model(3)

Model(4)



Model(5)

Model(6)



Model(7)

Model(8)

HHI

-0.037***

-0.032***



-0.021***

-0.014***



-0.051***

-0.045***



-0.040***

-0.043***



(0.002)

(0.002)



(0.004)

(0.004)



(0.005)

(0.005)



(0.003)

(0.003)

ln(nb_institutions)



-0.003***



-0.002



-0.003



-0.002**



(0.001)



(0.002)



(0.002)



(0.001)

ln(nb_authors)



-0.000



0.001



-0.002



-0.002*



(0.001)



(0.001)



(0.002)



(0.001)

ln(nb_references)



0.003***



0.013***



0.005***



-0.001**



(0.000)



(0.001)



(0.001)



(0.001)

_cons

0.722***

0.713***



0.710***

0.673***



0.750***

0.732***



0.752***

0.761***



(0.005)

(0.005)



(0.005)

(0.006)



(0.004)

(0.006)



(0.002)

(0.004)

Year fixed effects

Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes

Institution type effects

Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes



Yes

Yes

Observations

13,225

13,225



3,726

3,726



3,002

3,002



6,497

6,497

R-squared

0.036

0.050



0.022

0.065



0.045

0.054



0.036

0.039

Robust standard errors in parentheses，*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

37



4.3.3 Analysis of citation behavior differentiation

Meanwhile, as observed in Fig. 15, the distinct citation preferences between academia and industry in

their respective research. Academia demonstrates a stronger inclination to cite papers within the academic

domain, whereas industry tends to favor citations from industrial publications. This citation pattern reflects

the divergent research priorities and objectives of the two sectors: academia typically emphasizes theoretical

exploration, methodological innovation, and scholarly discourse, while industry is more focused on

practicality, application outcomes, and addressing market-driven needs.

To further explore this phenomenon, we analyzed the excess self-citation between academia and

industry to measure the extent of their attention to each other’s research. Fig. 18 shows the trend between

academia and industry at the level of self-citation rate, where values greater than zero represent a preference

for self-citation and values less than zero represent cross-citation.

It can be observed that industry shows a stronger tendency to cite articles from the same institutional

type compared to academia. Academic researchers are relatively less likely to self-cite when citing, meaning

that they are more likely to be familiar with both their own work and that of industry, and that academic

research covers a wider range of content (Liang et al., 2024).

Examining Fig. 18 further, we find that there has been a certain increase in the excess self-citation rate

in academia since 2016. This phenomenon may be closely related to the growth of the model’s computational

demand, suggesting a structural adjustment in the research orientation of academia. In particular, when

research topics are under pressure from high computational power consumption and hardware costs, the

pattern of resource allocation and the degree of focus of academics in specific research directions may have

changed subsequently.

In exploring the situation of ECC rates in academia after 2016, we consider that there is a high

dependence on GPUs for fine-tuning deep learning and pre-trained models. In addition, hardware-related

terms such as GPU, TPU, CUDA, CPU, etc., are closely related to cutting-edge distributed computing tasks

such as deep learning and pre-trained models. We use these hardware-related terms as indicators, assuming

that papers mentioning them directly exhibit higher computing resource dependency for distinguishing

studies with varying computational demands.

We obtained 642 papers (including 512 academic papers) containing the above entities, which we

categorized as high computational demand papers. The rest are categorized as low computational demand

research papers. The Mann-Whitney U test found that the academic citations of low computational demand

38



papers are significantly higher than those of high computational demand papers (𝑝< 0.001). This result

suggests that high computational demand research may rely more on the accumulation of technical practices

and pay relatively less attention to the innovations of academia.

Fig. 18. Excess self-citation in academia and industry

Fig. 19. Boxplot of the proportion of academic papers cited by different computing demands.

Notes. ***:  p<0.001, **:  p<0.01, *:  p<0.05.

To prevent potential bias, we further employ propensity score matching (PSM) for robustness testing.

We eliminated covariate differences between different computational demand groups by estimating the

propensity scores through a Logit model using the number of institutions, number of authors, number of


## references, and year as covariates. A balanced control group sample was constructed using 1:3 and 1:5 nearest


neighbor matching strategies for PSM, respectively, and the results are shown in Fig. 19. Both for academic

papers and all types of papers, the citation ratio of high computational demand papers to academia is lower

than that of low computational demand papers. Conversely, low computational demand studies cite academic

papers more frequently.

39



5 Discussion

Table D1 summarizes key findings of this study. Drawing on these, we elaborate on their

complementarity and extensions to existing literature on academia-industry links.

Firstly, this study quantitatively analyzes from the perspective of fine-grained knowledge. This study

reveals a steady rise in industry-academia knowledge proximity over time, with the 2018 emergence of pre-

training paradigms significantly accelerating knowledge convergence. Core technologies like Transformer

and BERT rapidly proliferated due to their superior performance, becoming shared knowledge carriers across

sectors. Meanwhile, open-source ecosystem development broke inter-institutional knowledge barriers,

enhancing the openness and accessibility of NLP technologies and methods. Further, heatmap analysis

intuitively illustrates discontinuous technological change (Dosi, 1982; Kuhn, 1962) (see Fig. 8). At the

technical standard level, Fig. B1 (c) indicates strong alignment in Metric entities between sectors,

standardization of core elements like evaluation metrics laid the groundwork for knowledge sharing (Aufrant,

2022), enabling researchers to advance toward unified goals.

Second, alongside technological development and rising knowledge proximity, two key shifts emerged

in knowledge network structures. (1) academia’s dominance weakened, with more balanced distribution

breaking early single-dominance; (2) network modularity declined, as closed internal knowledge community

boundaries between sectors dissolved, integrating more heterogeneous knowledge into the NLP network.

This restructuring stems from multiple factors. The growing knowledge burden in NLP (Jones, 2009;

Schweitzer & Brendel, 2021), requires cross-sector collaboration. Resource dependency has shifted, with

industry dominating the supply of core factors (Ahmed et al., 2023). At the same time, the industry has also

actively integrated into academic systems, participating in top conference submissions (Färber & Tampakis,

2024), driving knowledge openness.

Third, this study validates and extends knowledge flow theory, confirming mutual reinforcement

between knowledge proximity and knowledge flow. Higher proximity reduces inter-institutional knowledge

flow barriers, while more frequent flows further narrow the academia-industry knowledge proximity (Chen,

Mao, Ma, et al., 2024; Dolfsma & van der Eijk, 2016; Sudhindra et al., 2020; Syafiandini et al., 2024). The

study also finds that resource dependency significantly influences knowledge flow. Research with high

computational power requirements will be more closely associated with industry due to its reliance on

hardware resources from the industry, while reducing its dependence on academia.

40



5.1 The impact of external context on academia and industry knowledge

proximity

Although this study focuses on mining textual evidence of changes in knowledge proximity between

academia and industry, external environments such as policy support, market trends, and corporate strategies

also have multilevel impacts on knowledge proximity between academia and industry. We discuss these

factors in this section.

At the institutional and legal level, the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 in the United States, by clarifying the

intellectual property ownership of publicly funded research results (Chai & Shih, 2016; Mowery et al., 2001),

reduced the transaction costs of knowledge transfer and promoted the emergence of the third mission of

universities (Chai & Shih, 2016). It has provided an effective institutional incentive for tripartite cooperation

among government, academia, and industry to work together on the commercial utilization of government-

funded R&D results. European academia-industry partnership programs, such as the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft

and the Danish National Advanced Technology Foundation, practice empowering public research institutions

to support enterprise innovation. At the same time, these policies have spawned the widespread establishment

of joint laboratories, as well as intermediary institutions such as TTOs, which provide organizational vehicles

for academia-industry knowledge matching (Meissner et al., 2022).

From the perspective of market trends and corporate strategy, the Apache Software Foundation9 and

Huggingface community 10  represent decentralized knowledge production networks. By opening up

technical frameworks, they reduce industry barriers and attract academic institutions to engage in model

development. However, the dominance of the head firms in core resources such as computing power, large


## datasets, and talent (Ahmed et al., 2023) makes it possible to maintain their technological advantage by


controlling the supercomputing clusters required for distributed training even if they open-source the

underlying model.

Funding is also a crucial factor affecting proximity. Obtaining corporate funding can provide students

with new learning opportunities, thereby promoting their research activities (Lee, 2000). At the same time,

this will also lead to a reorientation of research in academia towards a gradual shift towards practice-oriented

research, which in turn leads to an application-driven model of knowledge production (Hoppmann, 2021)

9 https://apache.org/

10 https://huggingface.co/

41



and promotes close synergies. Yet there are drawbacks to a high reliance on industry funding. This can lead

to a risk of technological lock-in as the direction of the technology is deeply tied to the needs of the industry

(Hoppmann, 2021). Once the industrial demand changes or the technological development encounters

bottlenecks, the vulnerability in the technological system will be exposed.

5.2 Implications

We explain the significance of this paper from both theoretical and practical perspectives.

5.2.1 Theoretical implications

Research has revealed the dialectic between institutional logic and knowledge production (Vallas &

Kleinman, 2007). The new paradigm brought about by innovative technologies in NLP (Kuhn, 1962), a

scientific revolution (e.g., the Transformer architecture), has led to a reconfiguration of the knowledge system.

This has increased the knowledge proximity between industry and academia

The feedback effect of technological change on the knowledge ecosystem is vividly illustrated in this

study: Take the machine translation task (Brown et al., 1993) as an example, which was initially a key

application scenario prioritized by the industry. It not only validates the pulling effect of industrial needs on

the direction of academic research (Hoppmann, 2021), but also demonstrates the feedback that academic

research brings to practical problems in industry (Paniccia et al., 2025; Song & Wei, 2024). This has enabled

machine translation to regain vitality after many rounds of technological changes, such as statistical learning

and neural networks, and has become a landmark example of academia-industry collaboration in NLP.

In terms of the dynamic evolution of knowledge dominance, this study presents the trajectory of

knowledge dominance reconstruction. Whether observed from the knowledge co-occurrence network or the

direction of knowledge flow, academia dominated the knowledge in the early stage. However, along with the

continuous development of technology, the dominance of academia gradually decreases, and the bidirectional

flow of knowledge is characterized by an increase. At the same time, the exponential growth of domain

knowledge also raises the issue of “knowledge burden” (Jones, 2009; Schweitzer & Brendel, 2021),

highlighting the need for academia-industry collaboration to cope with complexity.

At the methodological level, this study adapts text mining and bibliometrics methods to innovation

theory, breaking through the limitations of traditional macro indicators (Aufrant, 2022; Blankenberg &

Buenstorf, 2016; D’Este et al., 2019; Fischer et al., 2019; Powell et al., 2005). This innovation not only

provides a quantitative tool for NLP, but also provides a replicable analysis paradigm for other subfields of

42



AI, and technology-intensive fields such as biomedicine and semiconductor technology by adapting the

theory and methodology.

5.2.2 Practical implications

Our research shows that technological paradigm change and knowledge flow are closely synergistic.

The pre-training paradigm significantly improves knowledge proximity. Subsequently, an open technology

sharing platform should be actively constructed, drawing on open-source collaboration, to establish a cross-

institution sharing platform covering core elements such as technical methods, tools, and datasets, and to

shorten the transformation cycle of laboratory results to industrial applications. Achieve the integration of

cutting-edge methods in academic research and industrial engineering tools, facilitate bidirectional

knowledge element flow via standardized interfaces and cut repetitive R&D costs.

For university TTOs, can develop an intelligent docking system based on technology entity matching,

adopt open-source protocols for sharing basic theory results, and patent cross-licensing for engineering tools,

balancing academic openness and industrial commercialization needs. Crack the problems of high transaction

costs and low matching efficiency in traditional technology transfer (Zaini et al., 2018). In addition, other

fields can also learn from the model of open source community and open source ecology in NLP, to promote

enterprises to share tools and datasets in technical practice in the form of open licenses, while academics

transform theoretical achievements into reusable technical modules through joint research.

Given that industry may dominate in AI research (Färber & Tampakis, 2024), the government needs to

play a key role at the regulatory level in developing a comprehensive and operational AI research code. At

the same time, governments can also promote the involvement of academia in the monitoring system of AI

research. The government can provide more external support to academia, covering key elements of AI

research such as hardware facilities, computing power, and data resources. This will help academia continue

to shape the frontiers of modern AI research, balancing the relationship between industrial interests and public

well-being (Ahmed et al., 2023). Moreover, academic evaluation can be improved within the academic

community. Increase the recognition of research results that engage in basic AI research with a focus on the

ethical impact on society, and by optimizing the evaluation criteria, guide academic research toward a diverse,

public interest-oriented development, and motivate scholars to conduct more socially responsible research.

5.3 Limitations

This study has several limitations. First, by focusing on English language top conferences, the data

43



sources were restricted to papers and citation data from the three major conferences: ACL, EMNLP, and

NAACL. This ignores other conferences and journals in the NLP field, as well as patent data. This may

underestimate the innovative contributions of industrial institutions in technological application (Sauermann

& Stephan, 2010). However, considering the characteristics of the NLP discipline, where cutting-edge

knowledge is primarily disseminated through top conferences, this study’s characterization of knowledge

within the NLP field remains representative and can effectively capture the evolution trajectory of

mainstream paradigms in knowledge production.

Second, due to the “multidirectional causality” in the NLP ecosystem, we recognize that industry and

academic driver explanations are limited in their ability to explain causality at the causal level, and that it is

difficult to strip the causal effect of a single variable through exogenous shocks. As Lewin and Volberda

(1999) mention, there are multidirectional causalities to this co-evolution. The study by Abatecola et al. (2020)

also suggests that relationships in co-evolution are reciprocal and simultaneous. Currently, in this study,

which side of the industry and academia dominates the other? This question remains unanswered.

At the data level, the OpenAlex data used in this study, while providing a rich resource for academic

research, may also introduce certain biases. For example, OpenAlex data may have missing information

about institutions (Zhang, Cao, et al., 2024), or incomplete reference inclusion. These may have an indirect

impact on the study results.

Finally, there may be an impact of bandwagon effects in the research (Zuckerman, 1977). When

Transformer and the pre-training paradigm became research hotspots, a large number of studies may have

focused on them to follow the trend. Particularly for certain studies with limited innovativeness, their

potential influence on research conclusions still requires more exploration.

6 Conclusion and future works

This study quantified the similarity of research content between academia and industry from both the entity

level and the semantic level, integrating citation evidence. It systematically reveals the coevolutionary

trajectories of knowledge production paradigms between academia and industry from 2000 to 2022.

In future work, first regarding data sources, the current study only uses conference papers from three

major conferences for research in the NLP field. We have not utilized data such as patent documents, journal

articles, and foundation project texts. In subsequent research, incorporating these additional data types will

enable more comprehensive analysis.

44



Second, as the link of the innovation system (Etzkowitz & Leydesdorff, 2000), there is still room for

expansion in the quantitative analysis of external policy and institutional environments in this study. External

factors such as government research funding, industrial policy orientation, and intellectual property rights

systems, as well as resource allocation logics, influence academic-industrial research directions. However,

the current study has not yet fully incorporated the impact of these policy variables on knowledge production.

For example, the extent to which government funding for NLP technologies influences the consistency of

academic-industrial technological pathways still requires further investigation in subsequent research.

Finally, at the level of causal interpretation, causal inference tools can be further utilized in the future or

based on technological event-driven case studies. Taking key time nodes such as the rise of the pre-training

paradigm (2018) and the ChatGPT technological breakthrough (2022) as entry points, specifically analyze

the academia-industry characteristics before and after these years.

45




## Appendix A. The descriptions and examples of entities.


Table A1 The descriptions and examples of entities.

Descriptions

(Luan et al., 2018; Zhang, Zhang, et al., 2024)

Examples

Type


## Method


Algorithms, models, frameworks, etc

BiLSTM,

RNN,

Attention,

BERT,

Transformer


## Dataset



## Data, resources, Corpus, Knowledge base


WordNet, Wikipedia, TreeBank, Twitter,

SQuAD

Tool

Programming languages, software, open-source

tools, etc

Python,

Pytorch,

Spacy,

GIZA++,

TensorFlow

Metric

Measures that can express quality of a method

Accuracy, BLEU, Recall, ROUGE, Cross-

Entropy


## Appendix B. Visualization experiment


Fig. B1. Heatmap of bag-of-words vector similarity for entities. (a) The heatmap of bag-of-words vector

similarity is based on Tool entities; (b) The heatmap of bag-of-words vector similarity is based on the


## dataset entities; (c) The heatmap of bag-of-words vector similarity is based on the metric entities;


46



Fig. B2. Semantic similarity heatmaps (threshold: 5%/20%) (a) Academia searching for industry papers

(5%); (b) Industry searching for academic papers (5%); (c) Academia searching for industry papers (20%);

(d) Industry searching for academic papers (20%)

Notes. The semantic similarity thresholds of 5% and 20% quantiles are 0.756 and 0.711, respectively

Fig. B3 shows the co-occurrence networks for each stage. Fig. B3 (a) shows the core hubs of the

academic network at the statistical machine learning stage as n-gram, Hidden Markov Model (HMM),

Expectation-Maximization (EM), and Support Vector Machine (SVM), which constitute the statistical

machine learning network. In addition, at the level of technology application, academic research also engaged

in related studies, such as the study of “WordNet” semantic network (Miller, 1995), and the optimization of

CRF feature engineering (Lafferty et al., 2001). In contrast, Fig. B3 (b) shows that the industry focuses on

the technology application path, building a technological closed loop around SMT (Statistical Machine

Translation), such as the alignment template approach (Och & Ney, 2004), and focusing on specific

applications.

In the deep learning stage, as shown in Fig. B3 (c) and Fig. B3 (d), the emerging pivot “Neural Network”

as well as “RNN” and “LSTM” gradually replace the traditional methods, marking the significant

improvement of sequence data processing capability. Notably, the Word2Vec model proposed by Mikolov et

47



al. (2013) addressed the data sparsity issues of traditional discrete representations through efficient word

vector space mapping, thereby establishing its classic status as a text vector modeling approach.

Fig. B3. Academic and industry entity networks in each period.

In the pre-training paradigm stage, the knowledge network topology has undergone a revolutionary

transformation. Super-hubs such as “Transformer” (Vaswani et al., 2017) and “BERT” (Devlin et al., 2019)

dominate the overall knowledge network. Under this new pre-training paradigm, both industry and academia

have integrated knowledge resources, exhibiting a more similar trend in knowledge production.

48




## Appendix C. Reliability of indicators


Fig. C1. Comparison of CV between indicators

Notes. ***:  p<0.001, **:  p<0.01, *:  p<0.05.

To quantify the stability and reliability of different indicators, we use the CV as the evaluation metric.

Essentially, the ratio of data standard deviation to mean, CV’s key advantage, effectively eliminates the

interference of dimension differences on stability assessment and intuitively reflects data dispersion. To

control random errors, random sampling was conducted annually with proportions ranging from 10% to 90%

at 20% intervals, and 10 parallel experiments were performed for each sampling proportion.

First, we calculated the annual CV:

𝐶𝑉𝑡(𝑟) = σ𝑡(𝑟)

μ𝑡(𝑟)

(C. 1)

Where 𝜇𝑡(𝑟) is the mean of 10 experimental results in year 𝑡,  and 𝜎𝑡(𝑟) is the standard deviation of

10 experimental results in year 𝑡.

We measured the annual average CV to obtain the long-term stability of a certain indicator under a

specific sampling ratio 𝑟.

2022

𝐶𝑉(𝑟) = 1

(C. 2)

23 ∑𝐶𝑉𝑡(𝑟)

𝑡=2000

The experimental results are shown in Fig. C1. Both the similarity index based on all entities and the


## method entity similarity index have lower long-term stability than traditional macro indicators. To verify this


49



difference’s statistical significance, we used the Mann-Whitney U test. Results show that, except for the

extreme scenario at a 10% sampling ratio, the proposed entity-based similarity indices’ CV values are

significantly lower than macro indicators, confirming that the proposed measurement method has higher

stability and reliability.


## Appendix D. Summary of analytical dimensions and results


Table D1.  Summary of analytical dimensions, methods, and primary results


## Analysis


Dimensions


## Methods


Primary Results

Chapter

Similarity scores showed a gradual overall increase

from 2000 to 2022, with a significant acceleration in

growth following the pre-training phase in 2018.

Knowledge

Entity Similarity

SciBERT

4.1.1

The semantic similarity at critical technological

inflection points exhibits a characteristic of sustained

high similarity over the long term.

Semantic

similarity

SimCSE

4.1.2

Academic

LCC

Academic leadership in the early stages, gradually

moving toward balance

4.2.1

Network

Dominance

Number of

overlapping

Calculate

shared

nodes

Overlapping nodes gradually increase, with the most

significant increase occurring during the pre-training

phase

4.2.2

nodes

Modularity declines during the deep learning phase,

while remaining stable at a low level during the pre-

training phase.

Network

Modularity

Louvain

algorithm

4.2.2

Direction of

Knowledge Flow

OpenAlex

Search

From unidirectional to bidirectional

4.3.1

Knowledge Flow

Correlation

regression


## analysis


The strength of correlation varies across different

stages.

4.3.2

and Similarity

Correlation

Differences in

The ECC is higher in the industrial sector; Research

with high computational demands cites academic

literature less frequently.

Citation

Behaviors

ECC; PSM

4.3.3


## Data availability


All the data and source code of this paper are freely available at the GitHub website:

https://github.com/tinierZhao/Academic-Industrial-associations

50




## Acknowledgments


This paper was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.72074113)


## References


Abatecola, G., Breslin, D., & Kask, J. (2020). Do organizations really co-evolve? Problematizing co-

evolutionary change in management and organization studies. Technological Forecasting and Social

Change, 155, 119964. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.119964

Abdalla, M., Wahle, J. P., Lima Ruas, T., Névéol, A., Ducel, F., Mohammad, S., & Fort, K. (2023). The

Elephant in the Room: Analyzing the Presence of Big Tech in Natural Language Processing Research.

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:

Long Papers), 13141–13160. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.734

Aceves, P., & Evans, J. A. (2024). Mobilizing Conceptual Spaces: How Word Embedding Models Can Inform

Measurement and Theory Within Organization Science. Organization Science, 35(3), 788–814.

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2023.1686

Ahmed, N., Wahed, M., & Thompson, N. C. (2023). The growing influence of industry in AI research.

Science, 379(6635), 884–886. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade2420

Alasehir, O., & Acarturk, C. (2022). Interdisciplinarity in Cognitive Science: A Document Similarity Analysis.

Cognitive Science, 46(12), e13222. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.13222

Al-Khalifa, H. S., AlOmar, T., & AlOlyyan, G. (2024). Natural Language Processing Patents Landscape


## Analysis. Data, 9(4), 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/data9040052


An, X., Li, J., Xu, S., Chen, L., & Sun, W. (2021). An improved patent similarity measurement based on

entities

and

semantic

relations.

Journal

of

Informetrics,

15(2),

101135.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2021.101135

Aufrant, L. (2022). Is NLP Ready for Standardization? In Y. Goldberg, Z. Kozareva, & Y. Zhang (Eds.),


## Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 (pp. 2785–2800). Association


for Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-emnlp.202

Ba, Z., Meng, K., Ma, Y., & Xia, Y. (2024). Discovering technological opportunities by identifying dynamic

structure-coupling patterns and lead-lag distance between science and technology. Technological

Forecasting and Social Change, 200, 123147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123147

Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2016). Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and

Translate (No. arXiv:1409.0473). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1409.0473

Barabasi, A.-L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439), 509–


## 512. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5439.509


Beltagy, I., Lo, K., & Cohan, A. (2019). SciBERT: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientific Text.

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the

9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 3613–3618.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1371

Bikard, M., & Marx, M. (2020). Bridging Academia and Industry: How Geographic Hubs Connect University

Science

and

Corporate

Technology.

Management

Science,

66(8),

3425–3443.

https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3385

51



Blankenberg, A.-K., & Buenstorf, G. (2016). Regional co-evolution of firm population, innovation and public

research? Evidence from the West German laser industry. Research Policy, 45(4), 857–868.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.01.008

Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., & Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of communities in

large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2008(10), P10008.

https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008

Brescia, F., Colombo, G., & Landoni, P. (2016). Organizational structures of Knowledge Transfer Offices:

An analysis of the world’s top-ranked universities. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(1), 132–151.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-014-9384-5

Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1998). Organizing knowledge. California Management Review, 40(3), 90–111.

Brown, P. F., Della Pietra, S. A., Della Pietra, V. J., & Mercer, R. L. (1993). The Mathematics of Statistical

Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 263–311.

Bush,

V.

(1945).

Science,

the

Endless

Frontier.

Princeton

University

Press.

https://doi.org/10.1515/9780691201658

Carayannis, E. G., & Campbell, D. F. J. (2012). Mode 3 Knowledge Production in Quadruple Helix

Innovation Systems: 21st-Century Democracy, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship for Development.

Springer New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-2062-0

Caviggioli, F., Colombelli, A., De Marco, A., Scellato, G., & Ughetto, E. (2023). Co-evolution patterns of

university patenting and technological specialization in European regions. The Journal of Technology

Transfer, 48(1), 216–239. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-021-09910-0

Chai, S., & Shih, W. (2016). Bridging science and technology through academic–industry partnerships.

Research Policy, 45(1), 148–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.07.007

Chen, X., Mao, J., & Li, G. (2024). A co-citation approach to the analysis on the interaction between scientific

and

technological

knowledge.

Journal

of

Informetrics,

18(3),

101548.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2024.101548

Chen, X., Mao, J., Ma, Y., & Li, G. (2024). The knowledge linkage between science and technology

influences corporate technological innovation: Evidence from scientific publications and patents.

Technological

Forecasting

and

Social

Change,

198,

122985.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122985

Chen, X., Ye, P., Huang, L., Wang, C., Cai, Y., Deng, L., & Ren, H. (2023). Exploring science-technology

linkages: A deep learning-empowered solution. Information Processing & Management, 60(2), 103255.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2022.103255

Chen, Z., Zhang, C., Zhang, H., Zhao, Y., Yang, C., & Yang, Y. (2024). Exploring the relationship between

team institutional composition and novelty in academic papers based on fine-grained knowledge entities.

The Electronic Library, 42(6), 905–930. https://doi.org/10.1108/EL-03-2024-0070

Chirico, F., Criaco, G., Baù, M., Naldi, L., Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Kotlar, J. (2020). To patent or not to patent:

That is the question. Intellectual property protection in family firms. Entrepreneurship Theory and

Practice, 44(2), 339–367. https://doi.org/10.1177/1042258718806251

Clarysse, B., Andries, P., Boone, S., & Roelandt, J. (2023). Institutional logics and founders’ identity

orientation: Why academic entrepreneurs aspire lower venture growth. Research Policy, 52(3), 104713.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2022.104713

Colombelli, A., De Marco, A., Paolucci, E., Ricci, R., & Scellato, G. (2021). University technology transfer

and the evolution of regional specialization: The case of Turin. The Journal of Technology Transfer,

46(4), 933–960. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-020-09801-w

52



Dahlke, J., Beck, M., Kinne, J., Lenz, D., Dehghan, R., Wörter, M., & Ebersberger, B. (2024). Epidemic

effects in the diffusion of emerging digital technologies: Evidence from artificial intelligence adoption.

Research Policy, 53(2), 104917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104917

D’Este, P., Llopis, O., Rentocchini, F., & Yegros, A. (2019). The relationship between interdisciplinarity and

distinct

modes

of

university-industry

interaction.

Research

Policy,

48(9),

103799.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.05.008

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional

Transformers for Language Understanding. In J. Burstein, C. Doran, & T. Solorio (Eds.), Proceedings

of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:

Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) (pp. 4171–4186). Association for

Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423

Ding, Y., Song, M., Han, J., Yu, Q., Yan, E., Lin, L., & Chambers, T. (2013). Entitymetrics: Measuring the

impact of entities. PLOS One, 8(8), e71416. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0071416

Dolfsma, W., & van der Eijk, R. (2016). Distances in organizations: Innovation in an R&D lab. British

Journal of Management, 27(2), 271–286. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12114

Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: A suggested interpretation of the

determinants

and

directions

of

technical

change.

Research

Policy,

11(3),

147–162.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(82)90016-6

Duede, E., Teplitskiy, M., Lakhani, K., & Evans, J. (2024). Being together in place as a catalyst for scientific

advance. Research Policy, 53(2), 104911. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104911

Elman,

J.

L.

(1990).

Finding

structure

in

time.

Cognitive

Science,

14(2),

179–211.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0364-0213(90)90002-E

Elzinga, A. (1997). The New Production of Knowledge. The Dynamics of Science and Research in

Contemporary Societies. Higher Education Policy, 10(1), 94–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0952-

8733(97)89702-4

Estrada, I., Faems, D., Martin Cruz, N., & Perez Santana, P. (2016). The role of interpartner dissimilarities

in Industry-University alliances: Insights from a comparative case study. Research Policy, 45(10), 2008–


## 2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.07.005


Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (2000). The dynamics of innovation: From National Systems and “Mode

2” to a Triple Helix of university–industry–government relations. Research Policy, 29(2), 109–123.

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00055-4

Färber, M., & Tampakis, L. (2024). Analyzing the impact of companies on AI research based on publications.

Scientometrics, 129(1), 31–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-023-04867-3

Fischer, B. B., Schaeffer, P. R., & Vonortas, N. S. (2019). Evolution of university-industry collaboration in

Brazil from a technology upgrading perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 145,

330–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.05.001

Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2001). Technology as a complex adaptive system: Evidence from patent data.

Research Policy, 30(7), 1019–1039. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00135-9

Gans, J. S., Murray, F. E., & Stern, S. (2017). Contracting over the disclosure of scientific knowledge:

Intellectual

property

and

academic

publication.

Research

Policy,

46(4),

820–835.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.005

Gao, T., Yao, X., & Chen, D. (2021). SimCSE: Simple Contrastive Learning of Sentence Embeddings.

Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 6894–


## 6910. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.552


53



Glänzel, W. (2012). The role of core documents in bibliometric network analysis and their relation with h-

type indices. Scientometrics, 93(1), 113–123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0639-3

Glänzel, W., & Thijs, B. (2011). Using ‘core documents’ for the representation of clusters and topics.

Scientometrics, 88(1), 297–309. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-011-0347-4

Glänzel, W., & Thijs, B. (2017). Using hybrid methods and ‘core documents’ for the representation of clusters

and topics: The astronomy dataset. Scientometrics, 111(2), 1071–1087. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-

017-2301-6

Haeussler, C. (2011). Information-sharing in academia and the industry: A comparative study. Research

Policy, 40(1), 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.08.007

Haney, B. S. (2020). Patents for NLP Software: An Empirical Review. SSRN Electronic Journal, 18(4), 27–


## 58. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3594515


Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735–1780.

https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735

Hofstadter, D. R., & Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and essences: Analogy as the fuel and fire of thinking. Basic

books.

Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities.

Proceedings

of

the

National

Academy

of

Sciences,

79(8),

2554–2558.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.79.8.2554

Hoppmann, J. (2021). Hand in hand to Nowhereland? How the resource dependence of research institutes

influences

their

co-evolution

with

industry.

Research

Policy,

50(2),

104145.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104145

Hottenrott, H., Rose, M. E., & Lawson, C. (2021). The rise of multiple institutional affiliations in academia.

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 72(8), 1039–1058.

https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24472

Hou, Y., Jochim, C., Gleize, M., Bonin, F., & Ganguly, D. (2021). TDMSci: A Specialized Corpus for

Scientific Literature Entity Tagging of Tasks Datasets and Metrics. Proceedings of the 16th Conference

of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, 707–714.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.59

Jeon, D., Ahn, J. M., Kim, J., & Lee, C. (2022). A doc2vec and local outlier factor approach to measuring the

novelty

of

patents.

Technological

Forecasting

and

Social

Change,

174,

121294.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121294

Jiang, F., Pan, T., Wang, J., & Ma, Y. (2024). To academia or industry: Mobility and impact on ACM fellows’

scientific

careers.

Information

Processing

&

Management,

61(4),

103736.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.103736

Jones, B. F. (2009). The Burden of Knowledge and the “Death of the Renaissance Man”: Is Innovation

Getting Harder? Review of Economic Studies, 76(1), 283–317. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-

937X.2008.00531.x

Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press.

Lafferty, J. D., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. C. N. (2001). Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models

for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference

on Machine Learning, 282–289.

Larivière, V., Macaluso, B., Mongeon, P., Siler, K., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2018). Vanishing industries and the

rising monopoly of universities in published research. PLOS ONE, 13(8), e0202120.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202120

54



Lawton Smith, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (2014). The Triple Helix in the context of global change: Dynamics

and challenges. Prometheus, 32(4). https://doi.org/10.1080/08109028.2014.972135

Lee, Y. S. (2000). The Sustainability of University-Industry Research Collaboration: An Empirical

Assessment.

The

Journal

of

Technology

Transfer,

25(2),

111–133.

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007895322042

Lewin, A. Y., & Volberda, H. W. (1999). Prolegomena on Coevolution: A Framework for Research on

Strategy

and

New

Organizational

Forms.

Organization

Science,

10(5),

519–534.

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.10.5.519

Lian, X., Zhang, Y., Wu, M., & Guo, Y. (2025). Do scientific knowledge flows inspire exploratory innovation?

Evidence

from

US

biomedical

and

life

sciences

firms.

Technovation,

140,

103153.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2024.103153

Liang, L., Han, Z., Zou, J., & Acuna, D. E. (2024). The complementary contributions of academia and

industry to AI research. ArXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.10268

Liu, D., & Zhu, Y. P. (2023). Evolution of Knowledge Structure in an Emerging Field Based on a Triple Helix

Model: The Case of Smart Factory. Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 14(4), 4583–4607.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-022-01073-z

Liu, M., Xie, Z., Yang, A. J., Yu, C., Xu, J., Ding, Y., & Bu, Y. (2024). The prominent and heterogeneous

gender disparities in scientific novelty: Evidence from biomedical doctoral theses. Information

Processing & Management, 61(4), 103743. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.103743

Luan, Y., He, L., Ostendorf, M., & Hajishirzi, H. (2018). Multi-Task Identification of Entities, Relations, and

Coreference for Scientific Knowledge Graph Construction. In E. Riloff, D. Chiang, J. Hockenmaier, &

J. Tsujii (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language

Processing

(pp.

3219–3232).

Association

for

Computational

Linguistics.

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D18-1360

Luo, W., Ma, C., Fang, Y., & Lakshmanan, L. V. S. (2023). A Survey of Densest Subgraph Discovery on

Large Graphs (No. arXiv:2306.07927). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.07927

Lyu, H., Bu, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhang, J., & Li, J. (2022). Citation bias in measuring knowledge flow: Evidence

from the web of science at the discipline level. Journal of Informetrics, 16(4), 101338.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2022.101338

Meissner, D., & Shmatko, N. (2017). “Keep open”: The potential of gatekeepers for the aligning universities

to the new Knowledge Triangle. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 123, 191–198.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.03.012

Meissner, D., Zhou, Y., Fischer, B., & Vonortas, N. (2022). A multilayered perspective on entrepreneurial

universities: Looking into the dynamics of joint university-industry labs. Technological Forecasting and

Social Change, 178, 121573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121573

Meng, K., Ba, Z., Ma, Y., & Li, G. (2024). A network coupling approach to detecting hierarchical linkages

between science and technology. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology,

75(2), 167–187. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24847

Merton, R. K. (1968). Social Theory and Social Structure. Simon and Schuster.

Merton, R. K. (1973). The normative structure of science. The sociology of science. In University of Chicago

Press, Chicago.

Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed representations of words

and phrases and their compositionality. Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural

Information Processing Systems - Volume 2, 3111–3119.

55



Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: A lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 39–41.

https://doi.org/10.1145/219717.219748

Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N., & Ziedonis, A. A. (2001). The growth of patenting and licensing

by U.S. universities: An assessment of the effects of the Bayh–Dole act of 1980. Research Policy, 30(1),

99–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00100-6

Mukherjee, S., Romero, D. M., Jones, B., & Uzzi, B. (2017). The nearly universal link between the age of

past knowledge and tomorrow’s breakthroughs in science and technology: The hotspot. Science

Advances, 3(4). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601315

Murmann, J. P. (2003). Knowledge and competitive advantage: The coevolution of firms, technology, and

national institutions. Cambridge University Press.

Nelson, R. R. (1994). The Co-evolution of Technology, Industrial Structure, and Supporting Institutions.

Industrial and Corporate Change, 3(1), 47–63. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/3.1.47

Nooteboom, B. (2000). Learning by interaction: Absorptive capacity, cognitive distance and governance.

Journal of Management and Governance, 4(1), 69–92. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009941416749

Nooteboom, B., Van Haverbeke, W., Duysters, G., Gilsing, V., & Van Den Oord, A. (2007). Optimal cognitive

distance

and

absorptive

capacity.

Research

Policy,

36(7),

1016–1034.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.04.003

Nsanzumuhire, S. U., Groot, W., Cabus, S. J., & Bizimana, B. (2021). Understanding the extent and nature

of academia-industry interactions in Rwanda. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 170,


## 120913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120913


Och, F. J., & Ney, H. (2004). The Alignment Template Approach to Statistical Machine Translation.

Computational Linguistics, 30(4), 417–449. https://doi.org/10.1162/0891201042544884

Paniccia, P. M. A., Baiocco, S., & Scafarto, F. (2025). A co-evolutionary knowledge exchange network for

the entrepreneurial valorization of academic research: Evidence from Italy. The Journal of Technology

Transfer. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-025-10190-1

Perkmann, M., Tartari, V., McKelvey, M., Autio, E., Broström, A., D’Este, P., Fini, R., Geuna, A., Grimaldi,

R., Hughes, A., Krabel, S., Kitson, M., Llerena, P., Lissoni, F., Salter, A., & Sobrero, M. (2013).

Academic engagement and commercialisation: A review of the literature on university–industry

relations. Research Policy, 42(2), 423–442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.09.007

Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. (1979). The External Control Of Organizations: A Resource Dependency

Perspective. The Economic Journal, 23(2). https://doi.org/10.2307/2231527

Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., White, D. R., & Owen-Smith, J. (2005). Network dynamics and field evolution:

The growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences. American Journal of Sociology,

110(4), 1132–1205. https://doi.org/10.1086/421508

Pramanick, A., Hou, Y., Mohammad, S., & Gurevych, I. (2023). A Diachronic Analysis of Paradigm Shifts

in NLP Research: When, How, and Why? Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods

in Natural Language Processing, 2312–2326. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.142

Price, D. J. de S. (1965). Networks of Scientific Papers. Science, 149(3683), 510–515.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.149.3683.510

Puccetti, G., Giordano, V., Spada, I., Chiarello, F., & Fantoni, G. (2023). Technology identification from

patent texts: A novel named entity recognition method. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,

186, 122160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122160

Rabelo Neto, J., Figueiredo, C., Gabriel, B. C., & Valente, R. (2024). Factors for innovation ecosystem

frameworks: Comprehensive organizational aspects for evolution. Technological Forecasting and

56



Social Change, 203, 123383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2024.123383

Radford, A., & Narasimhan, K. (2018). Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training.

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49313245

Rodan, S., & Galunic, C. (2004). More than network structure: How knowledge heterogeneity influences

managerial performance and innovativeness. Strategic Management Journal, 25(6), 541–562.

https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.398

Rossi, F., De Silva, M., Pavone, P., Rosli, A., & Yip, N. K. T. (2024). Proximity and impact of university-

industry collaborations. A topic detection analysis of impact reports. Technological Forecasting &

Social Change, 205, 123473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2024.123473

Rossi, F., Rosli, A., & Yip, N. (2017). Academic engagement as knowledge co-production and implications

for impact: Evidence from knowledge transfer partnerships. Journal of Business Research, 80, 1–9.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.06.019

Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning representations by back-propagating

errors. Nature, 323(6088), 533–536. https://doi.org/10.1038/323533a0

Sauermann, H., & Stephan, P. (2010). Twins or Strangers? Differences and Similarities between Industrial

and Academic Science (No. w16113; p. w16113). National Bureau of Economic Research.

https://doi.org/10.3386/w16113

Schweitzer, S., & Brendel, J. (2021). A burden of knowledge creation in academic research: Evidence from

publication


## data.


Industry

and

Innovation,

28(3),

283–306.

https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2020.1716693

Shao, Z., Yuan, S., Jin, Y., & Wang, Y. (2024). Scholar’s Career Switch from Academia to Industry: Mining

and Analysis from AMiner. Big Data Research, 36, 100441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bdr.2024.100441

Shibata, N., Kajikawa, Y., & Sakata, I. (2010). How to measure the semantic similarities between scientific

papers and patents in order to discover uncommercialized research fronts: A case study of solar cells.

PICMET 2010 Technology Management For Global Economic Growth, 1–6.

Song, X., & Wei, Z. (2024). Transforming academic knowledge into industrial innovation: The double-edged

sword

of

learning

from

universities.

The

Journal

of

Technology

Transfer.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-024-10118-1

Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., & McCallum, A. (2019). Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in

NLP. Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 3645–


## 3650. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1355


Sudhindra, S., Ganesh, L. S., & and, A. K. (2020). Strategic parameters of knowledge sharing in supply

chains.

Knowledge

Management

Research

&

Practice,

18(3),

310–322.

https://doi.org/10.1080/14778238.2019.1654417

Sundermeyer, M., Alkhouli, T., Wuebker, J., & Ney, H. (2014). Translation Modeling with Bidirectional

Recurrent Neural Networks. Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural

Language Processing (EMNLP), 14–25. https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1003

Syafiandini, A. F., Yoon, J., Lee, S., Song, C., Yan, E., & Song, M. (2024). Examining between-sectors

knowledge

transfer

in

the

pharmacology

field.

Scientometrics,

129(6),

3115–3147.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-024-05040-0

Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,

licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6), 285–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-

7333(86)90027-2

Trippl, M. (2013). Scientific Mobility and Knowledge Transfer at the Interregional and Intraregional Level.

57



Regional Studies, 47(10), 1653–1667. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2010.549119

Tsay, M. (2015). Knowledge flow out of the domain of information science: A bibliometric and citation


## analysis study. Scientometrics, 102(1), 487–502. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-014-1339-y


Vallas, S. P., & Kleinman, D. L. (2007). Contradiction, convergence and the knowledge economy: The

confluence of academic and commercial biotechnology. Socio-Economic Review, 6(2), 283–311.

https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwl035

Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., & Polosukhin, I.

(2017). Attention is all you need. Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural

Information Processing Systems, 6000–6010.

Villani, E., Rasmussen, E., & Grimaldi, R. (2017). How intermediary organizations facilitate university–

industry technology transfer: A proximity approach. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 114,

86–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.06.004

Wang, F., & Liu, H. (2021). Understanding the Behaviour of Contrastive Loss. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference

on

Computer

Vision

and

Pattern

Recognition

(CVPR),

2495–2504.

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00252

Wu, K., Sun, J., Wang, J., & Kang, L. (2025). How does science convergence influence technology

convergence? Different impacts of science-push and technology-pull. Technological Forecasting and

Social Change, 215, 124114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2025.124114

Wu, L., Wang, D., & Evans, J. A. (2019). Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology.

Nature, 566(7744), 378–382. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0941-9

Xu, H., Bu, Y., Liu, M., Zhang, C., Sun, M., Zhang, Y., Meyer, E., Salas, E., & Ding, Y. (2022). Team power

dynamics and team impact: New perspectives on scientific collaboration using career age as a proxy for

team power. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 73(10), 1489–1505.

https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24653

Xu, S., Li, L., An, X., Hao, L., & Yang, G. (2021). An approach for detecting the commonality and specialty

between

scientific

publications

and

patents.

Scientometrics,

126(9),

7445–7475.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-021-04085-9

Yang, J., Jin, H., Tang, R., Han, X., Feng, Q., Jiang, H., Zhong, S., Yin, B., & Hu, X. (2024). Harnessing the

Power of LLMs in Practice: A Survey on ChatGPT and Beyond. ACM Transactions on Knowledge

Discovery from Data, 18(6), 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1145/3649506

Zaini, S., Ismail, N., & Sidek, S. (2018). Gaps between industrialist and academia in commercializing

research products: Industrial perspectives. Journal of Fundamental and Applied Sciences, 9(6S), 917.

https://doi.org/10.4314/jfas.v9i6s.68

Zhang, H., Zhang, C., & Wang, Y. (2024). Revealing the technology development of natural language

processing: A Scientific entity-centric perspective. Information Processing & Management, 61(1),


## 103574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2023.103574


Zhang, L., Cao, Z., Shang, Y., Sivertsen, G., & Huang, Y. (2024). Missing institutions in OpenAlex: Possible

reasons,

implications,

and

solutions.

Scientometrics,

129(10),

5869–5891.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-023-04923-y

Zhou, M., Duan, N., Liu, S., & Shum, H.-Y. (2020). Progress in Neural NLP: Modeling, Learning, and

Reasoning. Engineering, 6(3), 275–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2019.12.014

Zuckerman, H. (1977). Scientific elite: Nobel laureates in the United States. Transaction Publishers.

58