epl draft

Is your EPL attractive?

Classiﬁcation of publications through

download statistics

O. Mryglod1, R. Kenna2 and Yu. Holovatch1

1 Institute for Condensed Matter Physics of the National Acad. Sci. of Ukraine,

79011 Lviv, Ukraine

2 Applied Mathematics Research Centre, Coventry University, Coventry, CV1 5FB, England

arXiv:1409.7889v2  [cs.DL]  4 Dec 2014

PACS 01.75.+m – Science and society

PACS 89.65.-s – Social and economic systems

PACS 89.75.-k – Complex systems


## Abstract –Here we consider the download statistics of EPL publications. We ﬁnd that papers in


the journal are characterised by fast accumulations of downloads during the ﬁrst couple of months

after publication, followed by slower rates thereafter, behaviour which can be represented by a

model with predictive power. We also ﬁnd that individual papers can be classiﬁed in various ways,

allowing us to compare categories for open-access and non-open-access papers. For example, for

the latter publications, which comprise the bulk of EPL papers, a small proportion (2%) display

intense bursts of download activity, possibly following an extended period of less remarkable

behaviour. About 18% have an especially high degree of attractiveness over and above what is

typical for the journal. One can also classify the ageing of attractiveness by examining download

half-lives. Approximately 18% have strong interest initially, waning in time. A further 20% exhibit

“delayed recognition” with relatively late spurs in download activity. Although open-access papers

enjoy more downloads on average, the proportions falling into each category are similar.


## Introduction. –


The dissemination of scholarly re-

search through publication in peer-reviewed journals lies

at the heart of the academic process.

Having one’s re-

search peer reviewed and published is, however, only the

start of the journey to academic recognition, even with

journals of high repute. Increasingly, citation-based met-

rics have come to be used as indicators of the value of

individual research papers and, indeed, of the calibre of

their authors.

Journals are also interested in measure-

ments of performance and the use of impact factors is

now ubiquitous.

Citation-based estimates of individual

papers, researchers and journals have become so impor-

tant to scientists that, rather than leaving it entirely in

the hands of scientometricians, managers and policy mak-

ers, many physicists have taken to investigate various as-

pects of measuring science themselves [1–9]. Besides these

practical motivations for physicists to turn the scientiﬁc

process on itself, there are also curiosity drivers, and per-

formance data associated with scientiﬁc publications are

amenable to physicists’ tools [3, 4].

Motivated by both

practical considerations and by curiosity, then, we sought

to investigate the download statistics of EPL. We target-

ted EPL as “Europe’s ﬂagship letters journal” of broad

interest to the physics community. An understanding of

the downloading process here may deliver a viewpoint on

the value of scientiﬁc outputs complementary to others in

current use, in particular their attractiveness, and may

inspire similar studies for other journals, leading to new

ways to compare them.

Peer review, downloads and citations. –

The

peer-review process is generally recognised by academics

as the most reliable basis for evaluation of research [10].

While the strengths associated with expert judgement are

documented, the process is not perfect and drawbacks in-

clude subjectivity of referees, bias and the fact that the

process is labour intensive and time consuming [7,10–12].

While citations are considered as indicators of academic

impact, it is widely recognised that impact and research

quality are not the same [8,9]. The imperfections of cita-

tion counting are also well documented and include gra-

tuitous citing; bias; citation inﬂation; retrieval issues; dis-

cipline traditions, and the fact that many cited papers

are not read by citing authors [13, 14].

The long time

lags which are necessary to accumulate numbers of cita-

p-1



O. Mryglod et al.

tions represent another drawback.

Despite all of these

issues and more, the popularity of citation-based metrics

amongst decision makers persists, because they deliver au-

tomatic, rapid and cheap information. These drawbacks

have driven the search for alternative and complementary

approaches.

There is a weak but positive correlation between

citation and download numbers and undoubtedly some of

the factors which limit other metrics as a measure also

apply to downloads [15–20]. Therefore, while downloads

cannot be considered as a substitute for either citation-

based or peer-review-based approaches, they can play

a complementary role. While peer review and citations

reﬂect opinion about a paper’s quality and scientiﬁc

impact after reading, downloads rather reﬂect interest

beforehand [16]. In other words, in addition to popularity

and prestige [21], papers may be distinguished by their

attractiveness. In such a classiﬁcation, the overall number

of citations measures popularity, the number of important

citations [21] is evidence of prestige, whereas the number

of downloads reﬂects the level of attractiveness of a

publication. Here we wish to analyse download statistics

to study attractiveness of EPL papers.

100

80

% of downloads

60

40

EPL data (OA papers): April−June 2013

EPL data (non−OA papers): April−June 2013

Tetrahedron Letters [18]: April–June 2002

20

0

20

40

60

80

Age of paper (months)

Fig. 1: (Color online) Relative cumulative distributions of ages

of downloaded papers. The ‘+’ symbols, (green) represent non-

OA EPL papers, ‘×’ (blue) represent OA EPL papers and ‘∗’

(black) represent data from Tetrahedron Letters [18].

downloading patterns of the entire journal as opposed to

individual papers. The diachronous considers time since

an individual paper’s publication. In this case, Month n

is article-speciﬁc and refers to the nth month after the

paper’s publication online.

The diachronous approach

therefore corresponds to download patterns for individual

papers.

Download data. –

IOPscience is the online service

for the journals of the Institute of Physics (IoP). We were

provided with data on the full-text downloads for papers,

published in EPL between January 2007 to June 2013

with one month resolution. The downloads are counted

on an IP-address basis with multiple requests made from

the same address considered as separate downloads. Only

full-text downloads from the IOPscience web-pages are

counted. The data are automatically cleansed of suspi-

cious and robot activity, and are COUNTER compliant.

For the purposes of our analysis, papers published online

after the 25th day of a given month were allocated to the

following month because of the small lag time for down-

load accumulations. All EPL papers are freely download-

able for 2 months after online publication. The open ac-

cess (OA) period can be extended in some cases and such

papers have diﬀerent download statistics as evidenced in

Fig. 1. There is an increasing number of ways to download

EPL articles without going through IOPscience, most no-

tably from the arXiv and personal web-sites. In 2013, in

particular, counts to all IOP hosted journals were down

by about 10% on 2012 probably due to Google modifying

their search algorithm in favour of articles that are not

behind paywalls.

With these various aspects and caveats in mind, we

proceed to report on our case study of the analysis of

publications downloads and aging in EPL. Our data set

comprises 4 986 non-OA papers and 377 OA papers.

We

use both synchronous and diachronous approaches [18].

The synchronous approach is calendar based, wherein

Month 1 refers to January 2007, Month 2 to February

2007, and so on, with Month 78 referring to June 2013.

The synchronous approach is appropriate to describe the

Synchronous

approach.

–

Since January 2007,

an average of 64 papers have been published online in

EPL each month. Following ref. [18], one can construct

cumulative distribution curves by age, starting on given

dates. The digitised version of Fig. 1 from ref. [18] which

corresponds to download data for the journal Tetrahe-

dron Letters [22] is presented in Fig. 1 along with the

corresponding EPL data both for OA and non-OA papers

downloaded during April–June 2013. Data labeled (x, y)

indicate that within given period y% of downloads were

to papers x months old or less. In ref. [18] a critical point

of 3 months was identiﬁed, as a demarcation between two

diﬀerent regimes characterised by diﬀerent slopes to the

left and right of the Tetrahedron Letters curve (see also

[16]). The diﬀerence was ascribed to recent publications

being downloaded because of their novelty and older

papers for archiving, background reading or similar. The

slopes corresponding to the EPL curves do not change

so dramatically, although softer transitions are evident.

One may conjecture that the diﬀerence between the two

journals could be caused by disciplinary peculiarities

or diﬀerent rules for access.

(Tetrahedron Letters does

not have an initial 2-month period of open-accessibility

comparable to that of EPL.)

To understand the shape of the cumulative distributions

depicted in Fig. 1, we consider the non-cumulative data in

Fig. 2. Here we plot the density of downloads ρ – deﬁned

as mean numbers of downloads per paper – against their

age. Two diﬀerent regimes are again distinguished; new

p-2



Is your EPL attractive?

100

non−OA−papers

OA−papers

−0.50

80

% of downloads

Month 1 (Jan 07)

Month 7 (Jul 07)

Month 13 (Jan 08)

Month 25 (Jan 09)

Month 37 (Jan 10)

Month 49 (Jan 11)

Month 61 (Jan 12)

Month 73 (Jan 13)

Month 78 (Jun 13)

Month 100

Month 200

Month 400

Month 400 (OA−papers)

60

−0.86

10

1

ρ

−0.03

40

−0.02

20

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

80

Age of paper (months)

Age of paper (months)

Fig. 2: (Color online) Density of downloads per paper (ρ) ver-

sus papers’ ages. The solid curves show the predictions of the

model (1) and the corresponding exponential decay constants

are indicated.

Fig. 3: (Color online) Cumulative distributions of ages of pa-

pers downloaded during diﬀerent months for EPL. The model

(1) delivers the curves and predictions for long-term behaviour.

2013 can be to papers up to x = 77 months old.

The plot in Fig. 3 can be used to determine ages of the

papers required to provide a certain percentage of down-

loads within a particular month. For example, y = 50%

of non-OA downloads during January 2013 were to papers

x = 17 months old or less.

Our model also allows us to see the approach of the

cumulative curves to a limiting distribution and the pre-

dictions of the model using extrapolated values for the

100th, 200th and 400th months are presented for non-OA

papers. These can be compared to the predictions for OA

papers, which are also shown in the ﬁgure.

This allows us to make predictions for the long-term be-

haviour. For example, in the long term, typically y = 50%

of non-OA downloads during a given month are to papers

x = 25 months old or less. For OA papers, this proportion

of downloads are typically to papers x = 10 months old

or less. Thus OA papers accumulate given proportions of

their downloads faster than non-OA papers.

papers attract more intense activity while after 5 or 6

months the download speed decreases. One may attribute

the enhancing of download frequencies during the ﬁrst

few months to the novelty and free accessibility.

In order to ﬁt to the two regions of Fig. 2, it is convenient

to use a two-factor model [18]:

ρ(t) = ρ0 [A exp(−b1t) + (1 −A) exp(−b2t)] ,

(1)

0 ≤A ≤1,

b1 > 0,

b2 > 0 ,

where A and (1−A) are relative weights of the two factors

(two diﬀerent motives for downloads) and ρ0 is the den-

sity of downloads which corresponds to the newest papers

(published in the month of downloading). The parameters

b1 and b2 are exponential decay constants corresponding to

early and later download patterns. Using nonlinear-curve

least-squares ﬁtting, we obtain the estimates for non-OA

papers A ≈0.84, b1 ≈0.86, b2 ≈0.02 (parameters close

to the estimates of [18] for Tetrahedron Letters: A ≈0.92,

b1 ≈0.50, b2 ≈0.014). The corresponding estimations

for OA papers are A ≈0.71, b1 ≈0.50, b2 ≈0.03. Thus,

the two regimes are observable for both data sets, but the

slopes are diﬀerent. The OA downloads are more concen-

trated on the ﬁrst months after publication online.

Fig. 3 is similar to Fig. 1 except (a) all the data refer to

EPL and (b) the download windows (each of one month’s

duration) vary, each period corresponding to a diﬀerent

colour (online). Since no particular seasonal eﬀects were

observed, of the 78 months for which we have data, only 10

representative months are depicted for the plot, for clarity.

These are Month 1 (January 2007), Month 7 (July 2007)

. . . Month 78 (June 2013) as listed in the ﬁgure. The cu-

mulative curves, based on a two-factor model are indicated

by solid lines. Downloads to papers during Month 1 (Jan-

uary 2007) can, of course, only be to papers which have

appeared during that month, so the only data point has

y = 100%. At the other extreme, downloads during June

Diachronous approach. –

Cumulative downloads of

individual papers are plotted in Fig. 4. The plot indicates

the diversity of individual download histories, the median

values of which can be considered as typical. This typ-

ical behaviour is fast accumulation of downloads during

the ﬁrst couple of months, followed by a slower rate there-

after.

The OA papers tend to accumulated downloads

more rapidly than non-OA papers. Correspondingly, the

median numbers of downloads for such papers are consis-

tently higher. We are also interested in unusual patterns

of downloads and our next concern is how to detect papers

which exhibit such behaviour.

“Bursty” papers.

A simple but straightforward way

to detect bursts in download activity is to ﬂag strong de-

viations from an individual paper’s typical download pat-

tern. Let σi(T ) be the standard deviation in the number

of downloads of paper i over its entire history to month

T . Let σmed(T ) be the standard deviation of the median

p-3



O. Mryglod et al.

Cumul. number of downloads

Cumul. number of downloads

10

3

10

3

10

2

10

2

10

3

10

1

10

2

20

40

60

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Age of paper (months)

Age of paper (months)

Fig. 4: (Color online) Cumulative number of downloads for

each paper separately:

dark lines (red) represent non-OA-

papers while light lines (green) represent OA-papers. The me-

dian values for papers of the same age are indicated by the sym-

bols ∗(black for non-OA-papers and yellow for OA-papers).

Fig. 5: (Color online) Cumulative numbers of downloads for

bursty papers. The main panel is for non-OA paper and the

equivalent plot for OA papers is shown in the inset. The me-

dian values are represented by the symbols ∗(in black). ‘Sleep-

ing beauties’ are highlighted (in green online).

values over the ﬁrst T months. Deﬁne

lives. The half-life M 50(t) is the number of months by

which a paper achieves 50% of its current downloads. The

statistics of these values allow us to ﬁnd papers with usual,

fast and slow download rates. We consider as ‘usual’ the

3 065 non-OA papers for which M 50

i

is between the 25th

and 75th percentiles (P25 and P75). These represent 62%

of the 4 890 non-OA papers considered. If M 50

i

is smaller

than the P25 value it means the downloads are initially

accrued faster than ‘usual’ and tail oﬀlater. We refer to

the 869 papers (18%) with this pattern as ‘ﬂashes in the

pan’. If M 50

i

is larger than P75 value, the paper has begun

its life with a download rate lower than average, only to

accelerate later. The 956 such papers (20%) are termed

‘delayed’. The corresponding proportions for OA papers

are similar: 65% have usual ageing behaviour and there

are 17.5% of the papers in each of the others two cate-

gories. However, while ‘ﬂashes-in-the-pan’ and ‘delayed’

non-OA papers settle into their ﬁnal ageing regimes al-

ready 4 or 5 months after publication (see the upper inset

in Fig. 6), for OA papers it takes a longer time period of

about 13 months.

∆i(T ) = |σi(T ) −σmed(T )|.

(2)

Each paper

is

characterized by

a

value

of

∆i(T ).

Bursts in activity may then be ﬂagged by large val-

ues of ∆i(T ) compared to the average value ⟨∆i(T )⟩.

Of

the

4 986

non-OA

papers

analysed,

three

have

∆i(T )/⟨∆i(T )⟩≥100 for certain values of T .

Thirty-

seven papers have ∆i(T )/⟨∆i(T )⟩≥10 and ninety-six

have ∆i(T )/⟨∆i(T )⟩≥5.

Since this represents a suit-

ably small fraction of all papers (≈2%), we choose

∆i(T )/⟨∆i(T )⟩= 5 as a critical value.

The download

histories of each of these 96 bursty papers are depicted in

Fig. 5, alongside the median pattern (for all papers). Ten

OA papers (2.7% of all OA papers) can be described as

bursty using the criteria described above and are shown

in the inset of Fig. 5.

Some of the bursty papers exhibit the phenomenon of

delayed recognition. Their download patterns are unre-

markable for an extended period after which a burst of

activity occurs.

We describe such papers as “sleeping

beauties” [23–25]. Thirty-ﬁve non-OA sleeping beauties

(two OA papers), for which the download bursts occur

later than 6 months after publication, are highlighted in

Fig. 5. The bursts in activity for the remaining bursty

papers come sooner after publication. For a summary of

these, and other, results, see Table 1.

To continue our


## analysis of usual EPL patterns, the bursty papers are ex-


cluded. Therefore we continue with 4 890 non-OA papers

and 367 OA papers.

Median download statistics for the above deﬁned three

categories are depicted in Fig. 6. The aging of downloads

for ‘usual’ papers goes more or less in a same way as the

overall median pattern. Flashes-in-the-pan papers rapidly

collect downloads after online publication but later the

rate of downloads decreases. It is noticeable that the me-

dian values for such papers in the long term tend to be

lower than the median values for ‘usual’ papers. Delayed

papers are characterized by a slightly slower downloads

at very beginning but they are well-downloaded later.

(Sometimes, the term “delayed recognition” has been used

synonymously with “sleeping beauties” but we distinguish

between these two terms in order to diﬀerentiate between

the papers with unexpectedly large bursts of downloads

Diversity of download patterns.

To categorise down-

load patterns, and thereby the ageing of the attractive-

ness of EPL papers, we borrow the notion of durability

which was developed for citation histories in ref. [26]. The

cornerstone of this approach is to consider download half-

p-4



Is your EPL attractive?

100

500

Cumul. number of downloads

Cumul. number of downloads

50

10

3

2

4

6

200

10

2

10

2

N

1000

100

500

200

10

1

10

1

50

20

40

60

50

(a)

(b)

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

20

40

60

20

40

60

Age of paper (months)

Age of paper (months)

Age of paper (months)

Fig. 6:

(Color online) Median values for cumulative num-

bers of downloads categorised according to half-lives: ‘+’ sym-

bols (black) represent ‘usual’ download patterns, ‘∗’ (red) are

ﬂashes-in-the-pan, and ‘×’ (green) represent delayed down-

loads. The corresponding values for all non-bursty papers are

presented by blue circles. The main panel is for non-OA papers

with the upper inset a blow-up for young papers. The same

plot for OA papers is shown in the lower inset.

Fig. 7: (Color online) Cumulative number of downloads for

(a) typical and (b) atypical papers separately: dark (red) lines

represent non-OA papers while the light (green) ones represent

OA papers. The median values for papers of the same age are

indicated by the symbols ∗(black for non-OA papers and yellow

for OA papers).

average, 15% are less attractive and for 13% the attrac-

tiveness is changing with time.

Here, as in Fig. 6, one

observes that the ageing behaviours for some of the cate-

gories look similar (see the lower inset in Fig. 8).

– sleeping beauties – and those characterized by gradual

changing of download accumulation – delayed).

Finally we wish to address the question of overall attrac-

tiveness of papers, as measured by downloads. The root-

mean-square deviation (RMSD) of cumulative numbers of

downloads from the standard values can be used to gauge

the extent to which patterns of downloads for individual

papers diﬀer from the standard one based on medians.

The value RMSDc = 66 was taken as critical1 to ﬁlter the

non-OA papers close to the standard. In this way, 2 926

(60%) ‘typical’ papers were identiﬁed (RMSD < RMSDc),

with the remaining 1 964 (40%) as ‘atypical’, see Fig. 7.

Using the critical value RMSDc = 105 for OA papers, 185

(50%) ‘typical’ and 182 (the other 50%) ‘atypical’ papers

were classiﬁed (see Fig. 7). For both categories OA pa-

pers accumulate constantly more downloads on average

comparing to non-OA papers.

The atypical papers (see Fig. 7 (b)) are analysed to see

the most notable examples of highly or poorly downloaded

papers. Among the non-OA papers there are 857 atypi-

cal ones (18% of all papers), which are characterized by

persistently higher cumulative download values compared

to the standard. Another 581 atypical papers (12% of all

papers) are always less downloaded, see Fig. 8. The cumu-

lative curves of downloads for the remaining 526 atypical

papers (10%) cross the standard curve from below (6%) or

from above (4%) similarly to the ﬂashes-in-the-pans and

delayed (see Fig. 6 and Fig. 8). The proportion of OA

papers for all these categories is again quite similar, see

Table 1: 22% of atypical papers are more attractive than

Perspectives and discussion. –

Using download


## data from EPL, for publications over a 6.5-year period,


we developed a statistical picture for the attractiveness of

the journal and its contents. The resulting insights are

complementary to those from other measures such as sci-

entometrics, altmetrics and inﬂumetrics and it is hoped

that the work will inspire similar download analyses for

other journals. The synchronous aspect of downloads from

the journal is well described by a sum of two exponential

decays corresponding to diﬀerent types of download activ-

ities (early and later in an average EPL paper’s life). The

model has predictive power for the long-term behaviour of

paper downloads from the journal.

Table 1: Categorisation of EPL papers according to downloads

(the data for OA papers are in brackets).

Categorisation by burstiness

98% are “non-bursty” papers

2% (3%) are

“bursty”

papers

4 986 (377)

papers

1% (1%) are “sleeping beauties”

1% (2%) burst early

Categorisation by half-lives (ageing of attractiveness)

4 890 (367)

non-bursty

papers

62% (65%) exhibit usual ageing behaviour

18% (17.5%) are ﬂashes-in-the-pan

20% (17.5%) exhibit delayed activity

Categorisation by overall attractiveness

4 890 (367)

non-bursty

papers

60% (50%) have typical overall attractiveness

18% (22%) are more attractive

12% (15%) are less attractive

10% (13%) change attractiveness

40%(50%)

are atypical

1This choice was made because of an empirical observation that

the number of papers with RMSD above criticality decays slowly for

RMSDc < 66 and rapidly for RMSDc > 66.

p-5



O. Mryglod et al.

nal, its contents and, indeed, its community of contribu-

tors and readers.

150

100

Acknowledgements. –

We thank Daniel Barrett

(IOP Publishing) and the staﬀof EPL for providing the


## data and assistance. This work was supported by the 7th


FP, IRSES project No. 269139 “Dynamics and cooper-

ative phenomena in complex physical and biological en-

vironments” and IRSES project No. 295302 “Statistical

physics in diverse realizations”.

50

500

2

4

6

200

100

N

50

500

1000

25

200

50


## REFERENCES


20

40

60

0

20

40

60

Age of paper (months)

[1] Schreiber M., EPL, 78 (2007) 30002.

[2] Schreiber M., Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 16 (2007) 640.

[3] AlﬁV., Parisi G., Pietronero L., Nature Physics, 3 (2007)

746.

[4] AlﬁV., Gabrielli A., Pietronero L., Cent. Eur. J. Phys.,

7 (2009) 483.

[5] Mryglod O., Holovatch Yu., Mryglod I., Scientometrics,

91 (2012) 101.

[6] Acuna D.E., Allesina S., Kording K.P., Nature, 489

(2012) 201.

[7] Thurner S., Hanel R., Eur. Phys. J. B Conden. Matt.

Complex Syst., 84 (2011) 707.

[8] Mryglod O. et al., Scientometrics, 95 (2013) 115.

[9] Mryglod O. et al., Scientometrics, 97 (2013) 767.

[10] Wasserman L., ISBA Bulletin, 19 (2012) 7.

[11] De Bellis N., Bibliometrics and Citation Analysis: From

the Science Citation Index to Cybermetrics (Scarecrow

Press) 2009.

[12] Bornmann L., Scientometrics, 91 (2012) 857.

[13] Simkin M.V., Roychowdhury V.P., Complex Syst., 14

(2003) 269.

[14] van Wesel M., Wyatt S., ten Haaf J., Scientometrics, 98

(2014) 1601.

[15] Perneger T.V., BMJ, 329 (2004) 546.

[16] Watson A., Journal of Vision, 9 (2009) i, 1.

[17] Kurtz M.J. et al., Inform. Proces. Manag., 41 (2004) 1395.

[18] Moed H.F., J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec., 56 (2005) 1088.

[19] Bollen J. et al., Inform. Proces. Manag., 41 (2005) 1419.

[20] Brody T., Harnad S., Carr L., J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec.,

57 (2006) 1060.

[21] Franceschet M., J. Informetrics, 4 (2010) 55.

[22] The international journal for the Rapid Publication of

communications in Organic Chemistry.

[23] Garﬁeld E. Current Contents, 21 (1980) 5.

[24] Gl¨anzel W., Schlemmer B., Thijs B., Scientometrics, 58

(2003) 571.

[25] van Raan A.F.J., Scientometrics, 59 (2004) 467.

[26] Costas R., van Leeuwen T.N., van Raan A.F.J., J. Am.

Soc. Inf. Sci., 61 (2010) 329.

Fig. 8: (Color online) Median values for cumulative number of

downloads for typical as well as for diﬀerent categories of atypi-

cal papers: highly downloaded (red ‘∗’ symbols), weakly down-

loaded (green ‘⋄’), weakly-then-strongly downloaded (blue ‘+’)

and strongly-then-weakly downloaded (black ‘×’). The corre-

sponding values for all non-bursty papers are presented by blue

circles.

The upper inset is a blow-up for young papers. The

same plot for OA papers is shown in the lower inset.

We observed some diﬀerence in the ageing behaviour

of downloads between non-OA and OA papers, mainly in

terms of volumes of downloads and how fast downloads are

accumulated. Otherwise, the proportions of OA papers

with diﬀerent download patterns are very similar to those

for non-OA papers.

A diachronous study shows that a very small proportion

of EPL papers are characterised by high levels of bursti-

ness in download activity. The ageing of the remaining

non-bursty papers can be studied using download half-

lives. The term ﬂash in the pan applies to about 18% of

publications and a similar number exhibit delayed recog-

nition. The remaining papers have more usual ageing pat-

terns.

The overall attractiveness of papers’ entire lifespans can

also be examined and, while the majority of papers accu-

mulate downloads in a rather typical manner, 18% (22%

for OA papers) have an especially high degree of attrac-

tiveness while 12% (15% for OA papers) are less attrac-

tive. The attractiveness metrics for a smaller proportion

of papers switches during their lifetimes.

One can speculate about the reasons for the various

download statistics observed and aspects such as novelty,

topicality and catchiness of title or a successful press re-

lease all can contribute to download characteristics. Other

factors include the target audience, whether the paper is

specialized, broad or, indeed, on an unusual topic. Similar

to citations, diﬀerent patterns of downloads are likely for

diﬀerent disciplines. Of course, one should be aware that

not everything downloaded is actually read. Nonetheless,

as a ﬁrst step on the road to scientiﬁc recognition, down-

loading is nowadays a widespread component of scientiﬁc

activity, so its statistics contain information on the jour-

p-6