LETTER

Distributed peer review enhanced with natural

language processing and machine learning

Wolfgang E. Kerzendorf1,2,3, Ferdinando Patat4, Dominic Bordelon4, Glenn van de Ven4,5, Tyler A. Pritchard3

arXiv:2004.04165v1  [astro-ph.IM]  8 Apr 2020

for the scientiﬁc output of the facilities. Diﬀerent measures were con-

sidered by the various facilities to alleviate the load on the reviewers.

This includes quite drastic solutions, like the one deployed by National

Science Foundation (NSF) to limit the number of applications (Mervis,

2014a).

In this context, one of the most innovative propositions was put for-

ward by The concept is simple: by submitting a proposal the principal

investigator accepts to review n proposals submitted by peers, and to

have their proposal reviewed by n peers. Also, by submitting m pro-

posals, they accept to review n × m proposals, hence virtually limiting

the number of submissions. We will indicate this concept as Distributed

Peer Review (DPR).

The Gemini Observatory deployed the DPR for its Fast Turnaround

channel (Andersen et al., 2019), which is capped to 10% of the to-

tal time. The NSF also explored this possibility with a pilot study

in 2013, in which each PI was asked to review 7 proposals submit-

ted by peers (Ardabili & Liu, 2013; Mervis, 2014b). The NSF pi-

lot was based on 131 applications submitted by volunteers within the

Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division. The NSF

did not publish a report following the study. A similar pilot experiment

was carried out in 2016 by the National Institute of Food and Agri-

culture (see https://nifa.usda.gov/resource/distributed-

peer-review-pilot-foundational-program, consulted on April

9, 2019.), but also in this case the results were not published.

We report on an experiment that employed the DPR at European

Southern Observatory (ESO) during Period 103 (call for proposals is-

sued on 30 August, 2018) in parallel with the regular Observing Pro-

grammes Comittee (OPC). We mirrored the deployment of the DPR

implementation at Gemini as an example, and enhanced the process us-

ing Natural Language Processing (NLP) and machine learning for ref-

eree selection (a diﬀerent method of using NLP for proposal reviews

can be found in Strolger et al., 2017). This experiment also added a

feedback for individual reviews.

The experiment was designed to test if there is a measurable diﬀer-

ence between the DPR and OPC, if the algorithm for referee selection

performed well, and if what referee attributes inﬂuenced the quality of

the referee report (as judged by the feedback to a review).

In Section 2, we describe the general setup of the experiment. Sec-

tion 3 is devoted to the statistical analysis and divided into Section 3.1

for the comparison between the DPR and OPC outcomes, Section 3.2

for the description of the literature matching, and Section 3.3 for the

evaluation of the helpfulness of reviews by the proposers. In Section 4

we summarize and conclude this work.

The supplementary information (SI) gives a more detailed descrip-

tion of the time allocation process at ESO (SI Section 1), a discussion

of the demographics of the experiment (SI Section 2), an extended anal-

ysis (SI Section 3), and several datasets related to the experiment (see

SI Appendices). We will refer the reader to the supplementary material

where appropriate.

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing,

MI 48824, USA 2Department of Computational Mathematics, Science, and En-

gineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA 3Center for

Cosmology and Particle Physics, New York University, 726 Broadway, New York,

NY 10003, USA 4European Southern Observatory, K. Schwarzschildstr. 2, 85748

Garching b. M¨unchen, Germany 5Department of Astrophysics, University of Vi-

enna, T¨urkenschanzstrasse 17, 1180 Vienna, Austria

While ancient scientists often had patrons to fund their work, peer

review of proposals for the allocation of resources is a foundation

of modern science. A very common method is that proposals are

evaluated by a small panel of experts (due to logistics and funding

limitations) nominated by the grant-giving institutions. The expert

panel process introduces several issues - most notably: 1) biases

introduced in the selection of the panel. 2) experts have to read a

very large number of proposals. Distributed Peer Review promises

to alleviate several of the described problems by distributing the

task of reviewing among the proposers. Each proposer is given a

limited number of proposals to review and rank.

We present the result of an experiment running a machine-learning

enhanced distributed peer review process for allocation of telescope

time at the European Southern Observatory.

In this work, we show that the distributed peer review is statisti-

cally the same as a ‘traditional’ panel, that our machine learning

algorithm can predict expertise of reviewers with a high success

rate, and we ﬁnd that seniority and reviewer expertise have an in-

ﬂuence on review quality. The general experience has been over-

whelmingly praised from the participating community (using an

anonymous feedback mechanism).

1


## Introduction


All large, ground- and space-based astronomical facilities serving wide

communities, like the European Southern Observatory (ESO), the At-

acama large Millimeter Array, The Hubble Space Telescope, and the

Gemini Observatory, face a similar problem. In many cases the num-

ber of applications they receive at each call exceeds 1000, posing a se-

rious challenge to run an eﬀective selection process through the classic

peer-review paradigm, which assigns proposals to pre-allocated panels

with ﬁxed compositions. Although, in principle, one could increase the

size of the time allocation committee (TAC), this creates logistic and

ﬁnancial problems which practically limit its maximum size, making

this solution not viable.

Since the referees only have a limited amount of time to perform

their task, the heavy load (which at ESO typically exceed 70 proposals

per referee; priv. comm. ESO OPC oﬃce) has severe consequences

on the quality of the review and the feedback that is provided to the

applicants. This contributes to increasing levels of frustration in the

community and to the loss of credibility in the whole selection process.

In addition, although diﬃcult to quantify, this will have consequences

1



2

Experiment Overview


## 2. the proposals are typically reviewed by Nr > 6 referees (while


Nr = 3 in the pre-meeting OPC process);

We followed a general outline of DPR as described in Merriﬁeld &

Saari (2009), but diﬀerences were introduced in several key areas.

Speciﬁcally, we test two diﬀerent referee selection methods: 1) the ﬁrst

selection method emulates the way that reviews are currently assigned

to members of the OPC to make a comparison to the OPC evaluation of

the same proposals. 2) an automated machine-learning method to as-

sign referees to proposals (based on the DeepThought-knowledge dis-

covery method; see Kerzendorf, 2019). We believe that the advantages

of this method are that it scales easily with the number of proposals and

that, due to the automated construction, it might circumvent biases in

self-eﬃcacy (e.g., based on gender - see Ehrlinger & Dunning, 2003).

Finally, we also asked the participants to assess the reviews of their

proposal in order to understand what inﬂuences a constructive review

and potentially reward helpful referees in the future.

We have tested a DPR scheme on a voluntary basis for the ESO

period P103. The outcome of this experiment had no inﬂuence on the

telescope allocation. The DPR program for ESO P103 recruited 172

volunteers with each submitting one participating proposal (this is 23%

of the distinct PIs in P103). These proposals were evaluated in the DPR

process as well as with the general OPC methods.

For our experiment, the group of proposers and referees were the

same. We selected eight referees for each proposal using several rules

(see the Methods Section 6.2 material for an overview of the two selec-

tion processes used).

The reviewers accessed the assigned proposals through a web ap-

plication and were given two weeks to assess them. A detailed descrip-

tion of the review options are described in the methods section (see

Section 2).

The proposal quartile and the eight unmodiﬁed comments were dis-

played to the proposer. We ﬁnally asked the proposer to evaluate the

helpfulness of the comments (with details in see Section 2).

Figure 1 summarizes the process as a ﬂow-chart and the detailed

description of the process can be found in the Method Section 6.


## 3. the number of proposals per referee is much smaller;



## 4. the set of proposals common to diﬀerent reviewers is much


smaller;


## 5. there is no triage; an early removal of some proposals before the


OPC meeting


## 6. there is no face-to-face discussion.


A robust way of quantifying the consistency between two diﬀer-

ent panels reviewing the same set of proposals is that of the quartile

agreement fraction introduced in Patat (2018, hereafter P18; Section

9.2). Following that concept, one can compute what we will indicate

as the panel-panel (p-p) quartile agreement matrix (QAM). The generic

QAM element Mi,j is the fraction of proposals ranked by the ﬁrst panel

in the i-th quartile of the grade distribution, that were ranked in the j-th

quartile by the second panel. If we indicate with Ai and Bj the events ”a

proposal is ranked by panel A in quartile i” and ”a proposal is ranked

by panel B in quartile j”, the QAM elements represent the conditional

probability:

Mi,j = P(Ai|Bj) = P(Ai ∩Bj)

P(Aj)

.

For a completely aleatory process P(Ai ∩Bj) = P(Ai)P(Bj), and

therefore all the terms of the QAM would be equal to 0.25, while for

a full correlation, all terms would be null, with the exception of the

diagonal terms, which would be equal to 1. We note that the matrix

elements are not independent from each other as, by deﬁnition:

X

i

Mi,j ≡

X

j

Mi,j ≡1.

For the purposes of the main part of this paper, we will compare

the internal agreement of the DPR panels with that of the OPC (pre-

meeting). Section 10.5 in the supplementary information gives further

comparison between the OPC and DPR statistics.

For doing this, we will bootstrap the DPR data extracting a number

of sub-sets of three randomly chosen referees.

This choice for the DPR set is particularly interesting as it is di-

rectly comparable to the results presented in P18. The procedure is

as follows: We ﬁrst make a selection of the proposals having at least

6 reviews (164). For each of them we randomly select two distinct

(i.e. non-intersecting) sub-sets of Nr=3 grades each, from which two

average grades are derived. These are used to compute the agreement

fractions between the two sub-panels. The process is repeated a large

number of times and the average (p-p) QAM is ﬁnally obtained.

In Figure 2, we compare the QAM of our subsets with that of the

OPC pre-meeting panels. The latter was derived for the OPC process

for Nr=3 sub-panels (P18, Table 3 therein). In both cases the ﬁrst-

quartile agreement is about 40% (k=0.21), while for the second and

third quartile this is ∼30%. The top-bottom quartile agreement is 10%

(k = −0.60). The conclusion is that, in terms of self-consistency, the

DPR review behaves in the same way as the pre-meeting OPC process.

The two review processes are characterized the same level of subjec-

tivity.

3


## Analysis & Results


We received complete reviews for 167 out of 172 reviewers (97.1%)

at the deadline (with these 5 proposals excluded from the further anal-

ysis). The individual grades from each review were converted into a

global rank for each proposal (with details found in the supplementary

material) and translated to quartiles (A, B,C, D).

There are a myriad of statistics available that can be interesting

to apply to the dataset (some of them are explored in the supple-

mentary material). We therefore encourage the community to make

use the anonymized dataset to run independent analyses(available at

https://zenodo.org/record/2634598). Our main focus in this

study is to address three questions: 1) How diﬀerent is the DPR from

a more traditional OPC review? 2) How well can our algorithm pre-

dict expertise for a proposal? 3) What reviewer properties inﬂuence the

helpfulness of their referee report?

3.1

Comparison of the Distributed Peer Review to the Ob-

serving Programmes Comittee

The proposals used in the DPR experiment were also reviewed through

the regular ESO OPC channel. This allows a comparison between the

outcomes of the two processes. However, these diﬀer by construction

in many aspects, and so a one-to-one comparison is not possible. This

is because in the DPR experiment:

3.2

Domain knowledge inference

Another aim of the DPR experiment is to infer a referee’s domain

knowledge for a given proposal using machine learning. “Expertise”

is, unfortunately, no objective quantity. However, it is reasonable to


## 1. there is no a priori scientiﬁc-seniority selection;


2



Review

Reviewer Selection

conﬂicted

grade (1-5)

comment

8 reviewers

exclusion based on institute

Proposal

Proposer

DeepThought

OPC emulate

Group

Group

Reviewers

expertise matched

Reviewers

grouped

according to

ESO OPC rules

to proposal using

machine learning

Evaluation of the

Reviews

User receives

aggregate score

User evaluates the

helpfulness of

comments

Grade Aggregation

Figure 1: Overview of the enhanced distributed peer-review process. The graph shows the ﬂow of the proposal starting with the proposer in

the upper left-hand corned. The proposal then goes into the reviewer selection (with the two groups marked), via the review and ﬁnally to the

grade-aggregation. The loop closes with the proposer giving feedback on the usefulness of the review.

0.5

0.5

0.41

0.29

0.21

0.1

0.43

0.28

0.19

0.1

1

2

3

4

DPR subset 2

1

2

3

4

OPC panel 2

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.25

0.16

0.25

0.3

0.26

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.24

0.3

0.25

0.18

0.25

0.29

0.29

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.18

0.27

0.45

0.09

0.18

0.27

0.46

0.0

0.0

1

2

3

4

DPR subset 1

1

2

3

4

OPC panel 1

Figure 2: Comparison of reviewer agreement between both DPR and the classic process Comparison between the panel-panel for the OPC

subsets (left, from P18 Table 3) and the DPR subsets (right). Each panel shows the probability the second panel (or DPR subset) is grading

a speciﬁc proposal given the response by the ﬁrst panel. The probability is highest on the diagonal which suggests there is some correlation

between diﬀerent reviewers grading – albeit a relatively weak one.

3



About 55% of the users rated the comments in the ‘helpful’ and ‘very

helpful’ bins.

To check what factors might inﬂuence the ability to write helpful

comments we use the statistical method given at the beginning of this

section.

The reviewer’s expertise is expected to have an inﬂuence on the

helpfulness of comments. Figure 4a,b shows the inﬂuence of both self-

reported knowledge and DeepThought-inferred knowledge on the help-

fulness of the comment. The probabilities are very similar between the

self-reported and inferred knowledge. We highlight that experts seem-

ingly very rarely give unhelpful comments and that non-experts rarely

give very helpful comments.

The last test is to see how the comments helpfulness is be-

ing evaluated given the ranking of the proposal within the quartiles

P(helpful comment|proposal quartile). This shows a similar distribu-

tion to the other panels in Fig. 4. There are some small diﬀerences.

Comments for proposals from the second to the top quartile often were

perceived as relatively helpful. Comments on proposals in the last quar-

tile were rarely ranked as very helpful (Van Rooyen et al., 1999, ﬁnds

a similar eﬀect).

We checked whether seniority has an inﬂuence on the ability to cre-

ate helpful comments. Figure 4c shows some correlation between the

seniority and the ability for the referee to give helpful comments. Most

interesting is the apparent inability of graduate students to give very

helpful comments. This might be a training issue and can be resolved

by exposing the students to schemes such as DPR.

We have also asked about the helpfulness of the comment in our

general feedback (Supplementary Information).

The distribution of

comment usefulness follows the distribution of helpfulness for indi-

vidual comments relatively closely (see statistics in Supplementary In-

formation). The comments given in the DPR compare very favourably

with the OPC (see details in Supplementary Information).

P(self reported|DeepThought)

0.75

best

median

worst

DeepThought inferred knowledge

0.11

0.37

0.52

0.60

0.45

0.55

0.35

0.1

0.30

0.15

0.78

0.22

0.0047

expert

general knowledge

no knowledge

Referee self-reported knowledge

Figure 3: Accuracy of DeepThought expertise predciction Condi-

tional probability P(self reported|DeepThought) for the various combi-

nations of perceived and DeepThought inferred knowledge. The self-

reported knowledge came directly from being a required ﬁeld to an-

swer in the refereeing proposal. The match provided by deepthought

was calculated purely algorithmically.

assume that the self-judgement of expertise (self-eﬃcacy) is a good

measure that might approximate such a quantity.

Given:

• “self reported” as the self reported domain knowledge

• DeepThought as the DeepThought inferred domain knowledge

For

our

experiment,

we

calculate

the

joint

probability

P(Self Reported|DeepThought) using Bayes theorem:

4

Summary and Conclusions

The main advantages of the DPR paradigm (coupled to the

DeepThought approach) over the classic panel concept can be listed

as follows.

P(Self Reported|DeepThought) =

(1)

P(DeepThought|Self Reported)P(Self Reported)

P(DeepThought)

Advantages:

P(Self Reported|DeepThought) =

(2)

P(DeepThought) ∩(Self Reported)

• it allows a much larger statistical basis (each proposal can be eas-

ily reviewed by 8-10 scientists), enabling robust outlier rejection;

P(DeepThought)

Figure 3 shows the correlation between self reported knowledge

(see the detailed description of the experiment in the supplementary

material) and our predicted DeepThought inferred knowledge (see sup-

plementary material for a detailed description of the method).

We reiterate that we are not comparing to the true domain knowl-

edge but to the self-reported knowledge. We ﬁnd that DeepThought

will predict the opposite of the self-reported knowledge in only ≈10%

of the cases (predicting expert with self-reported “no knowledge” and

vice versa). We emphasize the ≈80% success rate of predicting “no

knowledge”. These numbers show a high success rate in removing

whose expertise does not overlap with the proposal.

• it removes possible biases generated by panel member nomina-

tions;

• the larger pool of scientists allows a much better coverage in terms

of proposal–expertise matching;

• the smaller number of proposals per reviewer allows for more

careful work and more useful feedback;

• coupled to the DeepThought approach for proposal–referee

matching, it is suited to be made semi-automatised; it also gives an

objective criteria for ‘expertise’ removing biases in self-reporting;

3.3

Rating the helpfulness of review comments

• it removes the concept of panel, which adds rigidity to the process;

After the review process, we asked the proposers to evaluate the “help-

fulness” of the review comments. A total of 136 reviewers provided

feedback.

The review usefulness distribution shows a steady rise, with a sud-

den drop-oﬀat the ‘very helpful’ bin, as shown in all panels of Fig. 4.

• it addresses the problem of maximising the proposal–referee

match while maximising the overlap in the evaluations, which is

a typical issue in pre-allocated panels (see Cook et al., 2005, and


## references therein);


4



P(helpful comment|DeepThought)

P(helpful comment|self reported)

DeepThought Inferred Knowledge

Referee Perceived Knowledge

0.14

0.24

0.39

0.24

0.14

0.2

0.39

0.27

best

expert

0.29

0.28

0.27

0.16

0.16

0.31

0.35

0.18

median

general knowledge

0.28

0.31

0.27

0.13

0.31

0.28

0.26

0.15

worst

little knowledge

1

not helpful

2

3

4

very helpful

Review Evaluation

1

not helpful

2

3

4

very helpful

Review Evaluation

P(helpful comment|seniority)

P(helpful comment|proposal quartile)

0.29

0.33

0.33

0.042

0.18

0.26

0.29

0.26

1st

Graduate Student

Proposal Quartile

Years after PhD

0.2

0.35

0.26

0.2

0.11

0.23

0.45

0.21

2nd

Less than 4 years

0.18

0.29

0.32

0.21

0.24

0.24

0.34

0.18

3rd

Between 4 and 12 years

0.25

0.22

0.35

0.19

0.22

0.34

0.33

0.11

4th

More than 12 years

1

not helpful

2

3

4

very helpful

Review Evaluation

1

not helpful

2

3

4

very helpful

Review Evaluation

Figure 4: Inﬂuence of various factors on the perceived quality of the review We show a number of factors that can inﬂuence the (perceived)

quality of the review that was graded by the proposers in the feedback step. Upper Row: Evaluation of the helpfulness of the comment given

expertise (inferred by DeepThought on the left panel and self reported on the right panel). Lower Left: We show the conditional probability

P(helpful comment|gender) for the various combinations of helpful comment rating and reported gender. Lower Right:We show the conditional

probability P(helpful comment|proposal quartile) for the various combinations of helpful comment rating and proposal quartile.

• The lack of a meeting does not allow the exchange of opinions

and the possibility of asking and answering questions to/from the

peers;

• the lack of a face-to-face meeting greatly simpliﬁes the logistics

and the costs, making it attractive for small, budget-limited facili-

ties;

• exposition of proposal content to a larger number of individuals

(167 vs. 78 in the real case of the DPR experiment) increases the

risk of conﬁdentiality issues.

• the absence of the meeting prevents strong personal opinions from

having a pivotal inﬂuence on the process;

• it involves a larger part of the community, increasing its demo-

cratic breadth;

The two major disadvantages can, however, be easily addressed:

barring the fact that its eﬀectiveness remains to be demonstrated and

quantiﬁed (see above), the social, educational and networking aspects

of the face-to-face meeting should not be undervalued. In this respect,

we notice that the resources freed by the DPR approach can be used by

the organizations for education and community networking (training on

proposal writing, fostering collaborations, ...). Another possibility to

enable the interaction between the reviewers is to allow them to up-vote

or down-vote the comments by other reviewers (the Science journal

employs such an approach) which could be used to exclude comments

and grades that were down-voted by a very signiﬁcant fraction of the

other referees.

We conclude that the participating community has reacted ex-

tremely positively to this (see Section B in the supplementary mate-

• all applicants are exposed to the typical quality of the proposals.

This allows them to better understand if their request is not allo-

cated time by placing it in a much wider context, and helps im-

proving their proposal-writing skills (comment by Arash Takshi:

“The ability to see what my competitors were doing ﬁlled a blind

spot for me. Now I know that if I don’t get funded, it’s because

of the quality of the other proposals, not something I did wrong.”

Mervis, 2014b);

• it trains the members of the community without additional eﬀort.

Disadvantages:

5




## METHODS


rial). The presented approach to infer expertise works very well (see

Figure 3). On an individual level, the behavior of the DPR referees con-

forms to the statistical description of the regular OPC referees (P18),

and there is no statistically signiﬁcant evidence that junior reviewers

systematically deviate from this (see Section 3.1). The introduction of

the possibility to rate the helpfulness of comments provides a new av-

enue to potentially reward helpful referees and train referees in general

on giving useful feedback.

We encourage other organization to run similar studies, to progress

from a situation in which the classic peer-review is adopted notwith-

standing its limitations in the lack of better alternatives. As scientists,

we ﬁrmly believe in experiments, even when these concern the way we

select the experiments themselves.

6

Description of the DeepThought DPR experiment

For an overview of the process see Section 2. In the next sections, we will

give a detailed description of the process of the DeepThought DPR experi-

ment.

6.1

Reviewer exclusion and selection

Reviewer selection is a core part of the experiment.

We separated this

step into reviewer exclusion and reviewer selection. We tested two diﬀer-

ent strategies for reviewer selection: one based on a standard methodology

(called “OPC emulate” [OE]), the other based on a machine-estimated of

the domain-speciﬁc knowledge (called “DeepThought” [DT]), which are de-

scribed in detail in Section 6.2.2.

We describe the reviewer exclusion and selection using the abstract con-

cept of a matrix. The matrix has a row for each proposer and a column for

each referee. In our case, the referees and proposers are the same set, and

thus we have a square matrix.

Our exclusion matrix was constructed in a way that would mark a referee

ineligible to review a proposal where any of the investigators were from the

same institute as the referee

5

Acknowledgements

This paper is fruit of independent research and is not to be considered

as expressing the position of the European Southern Observatory on

proposal review and telescope time allocation procedures and policies.

The authors wish to express their gratitude to the 167 volunteers

who participated in the DPR experiment, for their work and enthusi-

asm. The authors are also grateful to Markus Kissler-Patig for pas-

sionately promoting the DPR experiment following his experience at

Gemini; to ESO’s Director General Xavier Barc¸ons and ESO’s Direc-

tor for Science Rob Ivison for their support; and to Hinrich Sch¨utze

for several suggestions in the NLP process. The authors would like to

thank Jim Linnemann for help with some of the statistics tests.

We would like to thank the two anonymous referees and Anna Sev-

erin for providing constructive criticism that improved the paper im-

mensly.

W. E. K. is part of SNYU and the SNYU group is supported by the

NSF CAREER award AST-1352405 (PI Modjaz) and the NSF award

AST-1413260 (PI Modjaz). W. E. K was also supported by an ESO

Fellowship and the Excellence Cluster Universe, Technische Univer-

sit¨at Munchen, Boltzmannstrasse 2, D-85748 Garching, Germany for

part of this work. W. E. K would also like to thank the Flatiron Insti-

tute. GvdV acknowledges funding from the European Research Coun-

cil (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-

novation programme under grant agreement No 724857 (Consolidator

Grant ArcheoDyn).

p1

p2

· · ·

pn

referee1

1

1

· · ·

0

referee2

0

1

· · ·

0

...

1

0

· · ·

0

refereen

0

0

· · ·

1





,

(3)

Aexclusion =

where pn stands for proposern, 1 indicates conﬂict and 0 no conﬂict.

For the OPC-emulate group, we also constructed an additional matrix

(that was combined to the previous exclusion matrix using the logical or)

that marks a referee ineligible to review a proposal that was submitted to the

same unit telescope as the referee’s submitted proposal.

We constructed a reviewing matrix that marks a reviewer-proposal com-

bination with 1 (and the rest of the matrix with 0). We then used a round-

robin selection process to iterate through the referees. For each referee, we

use the exclusion matrix to determine eligible proposals and then the speciﬁc

selection criterion for each of the groups (outlined in Section 6.1) to assign

one of the remaining available proposals (taking into account the exclusion

matrix). This process was repeated until all referees had been assigned eight

proposals. If the process failed before completion, it was restarted with a

diﬀerent random number seed until we found a solution. A solution ma-

trix needs to have all row sums and column sums equal to eight. For fu-

ture projects, we strongly suggest to research algorithms from operations

research (or combinatorial optimization) that have been optimized for the

given process.

6.2

Reviewer selection methodology

We separated the volunteer base into two groups for our two experiments.

The ﬁrst group was 60 randomly chosen volunteers out of the 172. This

group was assigned proposals that would closely emulate the current way

ESO assigns proposals in the OPC (which is a variant of the common time-

allocation strategy present in the astronomy community).

The second group of the remaining 112 volunteers was assigned by pre-

dicting their expertise of a proposal based on their publication history using

machine learning.

6.2.1

OPC emulate Group

We aim with this selection process to emulate the OPC process. The mem-

bers of the OPC assign themselves to expert groups in four categories

• A - Cosmology and Intergalactic Medium

• B - Galaxies

6



• C - Interstellar Medium, Star Formation, and Planetary systems


## 2. from the available proposals choose the proposal closest to the median


of all cosine scores for that particularly referee for the next two pro-

posals

• D - Stellar Evolution

Multiple panels are then constructed for each subgroup (depending on

the number of proposals for each subgroup).

We attempt to emulate this process by constructing four groups (A, B,

C, and D) of 15 referees. Each of these groups only reviews the proposals

in their group. Thus each referee will only see proposals within the same

category that they proposed in.

We construct an exclusion matrix for each of the subgroups (see Equa-

tion 3) and then proceed with the review selection (see Section 6.1) where at

each selection step we simply randomly select any eligible proposal.

The total number of reviews from this process was 480.


## 3. from the available proposals choose the one with the lowest cosine


distance for the last two proposals assigned to each referee

The process was repeated with a diﬀerent random if there were no eight

suitable proposals available for each referee. Depending on the number of

constraints and participants it took on the order of three times too ﬁnd a

suitable solution.

6.2.2

DeepThought Group

6.3

Review process

The general idea behind this selection process is to use the published pa-

pers of each participant to predict how knowledgeable they were for each

proposal. This made extensive use of the dataset and techniques presented

in Kerzendorf (2019). This required identifying their publications, construct

knowledge-vectors for each referee, construct proposal vectors from the sub-

mitted latex document, construct a knowledge matrix for each of the combi-

nation of referee and proposal, and use this matrix in the selection process.

The participants were given a login to evaluate the proposals. After signing a

Non Disclosure Agreement (which is identical to the one signed by the OPC

members), the participants could view the proposals assigned to them. They

were ﬁrst given the option to indicate a conﬂict of interest (removing them

from making an eligible vote on the proposal). Then were asked for their

expertise on the proposal’s topic. They were tasked to review the proposals

by giving them a score (1 - 5; same as in the OPC), their assessment of their

knowledge of the proposal, and a comment.

We outline the steps in more detail in the following. The following

options were given to indicate a conﬂict:

Name disambiguation

The ﬁrst part of this process was to uniquely

identify participants in ADS to infer their publications. Milojevi´c (2013)

has shown using the last name and the ﬁrst initials only 6.1% of author’s

identities are contaminated (either due to splitting or merging) which is suf-

ﬁcient for the statistical requirements of our experiment.

We then used the Python package ads (available at https://ads.

readthedocs.io) to access the ADS API to search for the participant’s

papers (and their arxiv identiﬁers) without regard for position of authorship.

We excluded participants (moved them to the OPC emulate group) that have

less than 3 papers (9 participants) or more than 500 papers (4 participants).

• No, I do not have a conﬂict.

• Yes, I have a close personal or professional relationship with the

PI and/or team.

• Yes, I am a direct competitor to this proposal.

Knowledge Vectors

Kerzendorf (2019) shows in Section 4 the construc-

tion of vectors from publication (using a technique called TFiDF). We used

the document vectors from Kerzendorf (2019) given of all publications iden-

tiﬁed for each participant in the previous step. These document vectors were

summed up and then normalized. We call such a vector sum for each referee

a “knowledge vectors”.

The referees were instructed to consider the following questions when eval-

uating a proposal:

• Is there suﬃcient background/context for the non-expert (i.e.,

someone not specialized in this particular sub-ﬁeld)?

• Are previous results (either by proposers themselves or in the

published literature) clearly presented?

Proposal vectors

We use the machinery described in Kerzendorf (2019)

to process several sections of the latex representation (’Title’, ’Abstract’,

’ScientiﬁcRationale’, ’ImmediateObjective’) of the submitted proposal.

These were then converted to normalized document vectors which we re-

fer to as “proposal vectors”.

• Are the proposed observations and the Immediate Objectives per-

tinent to the background description?

• Is the sample selection clearly described, or, if a single target, is

its choice justiﬁed?

Knowledge Matrix

We then construct a knowledge matrix similar to the

exclusion matrix and ﬁll each of its elements with the dot-product between

the proposal vector and referee knowledge vector (cosine distance; see Equa-

tion 4).

• Are the instrument modes, and target location(s) (e.g., cosmology

ﬁelds) speciﬁed clearly?

• Will the proposed observations add signiﬁcantly to the knowledge

of this particular ﬁeld?

p1

p2

· · ·

pn

referee1

0.8

0.4

· · ·

0.1

referee2

0.5

0.9

· · ·

0.5

...

...

...

...

...

refereen

0.6

0.2

· · ·

0.7





Aknowledge =

,

(4)

They were then asked to assess their expertise of the proposal:

• This is my ﬁeld of expertise.

where pn stands for proposern.

As opposed to the OPC-emulate case, we do not assign proposals ran-

domly to the referees during the selection step in the referee selection pro-

cess (see Section 6.1). The proposals are picked according to the following

algorithm with diﬀerent steps for the ﬁrst four, subsequent two and last two

proposals picked for each referee:

• I have some general knowledge of this ﬁeld.

• I have little or no knowledge of this ﬁeld.


## 1. from the available proposals choose the one with the highest cosine


distance for the ﬁrst four proposals assigned to each referee

They were instructed to use the following general grading rules:

7



6.6

Questionnaire

• 1.0 outstanding: breakthrough science

Each participant in the DPR experiment was asked to ﬁll out a questionnaire

after performing the reviews and receiving the feedback on their own pro-

posal:

• 1.5 excellent: deﬁnitely above average

• 2.0 very good: no signiﬁcant weaknesses

Also, after reading the reviews, please take 10-15 minutes to ﬁll the

ﬁnal questionnaire (see the link at the bottom of this page). Although it

is optional, it is your chance to give us feedback on any aspect that you

liked/disliked and to shape a future DPR process. It will also greatly

assist us in understanding how the experiment went, learn about what

works and not, which biases are still present etc. It will allow us to

build better tools for you in the future.

• 2.5 good: minor deﬁciencies do not detract from strong scientiﬁc

case

• 3.0 fair: good scientiﬁc case, but with deﬁnite weaknesses

• 3.5 rather weak: limited science return prospects

• 4.0 weak: little scientiﬁc value and/or questionable scientiﬁc

strategy

Out of 167 participants, 140 returned a completed on-line questionnaire

(83.8%). Most of the questions were multiple choice (see supplementary

material Section A) with many of the answers used in the following sections

in the evaluation of the DPR experiment.

The questionnaire also included 5 free-format questions: (i) What sug-

gestions do you have to improve the software?, (ii) What suggestions do you

have to improve the assessment criteria and/or review process?, (iii) Do you

have concerns about your proposals being evaluated through distributed peer

review?, (iv) Do you have any further feedback or suggestions regarding dis-

tributed peer review?, and (v) Would you like to give any further feedback

and/or suggestions regarding earlier raised points on securing conﬁdentiality,

external expertise, and robustness versus bias?

Each of the 5 free-form questions was answered on average by 50 per-

sons with a sentence or more. The answers were very helpful in speciﬁc

suggestions for improvement and to get an overall feedback as summarized

in the main text).

• 4.5 very weak: deﬁciencies outweigh strengths

• 5.0 rejected

The referees then had to write a comment with a minimum of 10 characters.

6.4

Grade Aggregation

In the experiment design, each proposal was assigned to Nr=8 peers, and

each PI was assigned Np=8 proposals. In practice, because of the declared

conﬂicts, proposals were evaluated by 4 to 8 referees, with Nr ≥6 in 95%

of the cases. For the same reason, each referee reviewed between 5 and

8 proposals, with Np ≥6 in 98% of the cases. This guarantees statistical

robustness in the grade aggregation.

In the OPC process, the grades given by the distinct referees are com-

bined using a simple average, after applying the referee calibration. This

operation is described in Patat (2018) (Sect. 2.4 and Appendix A therein),

and aims at minimizing the systematic diﬀerences in the grading scales used

by the reviewers. In the current implementation, the calibration consists in

a shift-and-stretch linear transformation, by which the grade distributions of

the single referees are brought to have the same average and standard de-

viation (grades ≥3 are excluded from the calculations). This operation is

justiﬁed by the relatively large number of proposals reviewed by each ref-

eree (>60), which makes the estimate of the central value and dispersion

reasonably robust.

The case of the DPR is diﬀerent in this respect, as a given person would

have reviewed at most Np=8 proposals. Especially for the dispersion, this

limitation certainly weakens its statistical signiﬁcance. For this reason, fol-

lowing the example of the Gemini Fast Turn Around channel (Andersen

et al., 2019), and for the purposes of providing feedback to the users, the

raw grades were combined without applying any referee calibration (the ef-

fects of calibration in the DPR experiment are presented and discussed in the

main text).

6.7


## Data Collection


The proposals were distributed to the participated on 8 October, 2018. The

participants were given until Oct 25 (17 days) until the deadline to sub-

mit the reviews. At the time of the deadline 2 of 112 participants in the

DeepThought group and 3 of 60 participants in the OPC emulate group

had not completed their reviews and were excluded from the further pro-

cess (completion rate 97.1%). We received a total of 1336 reviews (from

167 reviewers for 172 proposals).

On 30 October the 167 remaining participants were given access to their

evaluated proposals and were given two weeks to provide feedback. Of

these, 136 (81.4%) completed the questionnaire.

We aim to allow further study of this dataset by the community. We also

want to ensure the privacy of our participants and thus have anonymized and

redacted some of the dataset. In particular, we have given the participants

randomized IDs and only give some derived products from the DeepThought

machinery (we are not sharing properties knowledge vectors as they might

allow the reconstruction of the individuals). In addition, we have removed

any free text data the participants entered (such as the comments on the pro-

posal). We have also removed all participants that did not reveal their gender.

This is a very small number and might be used to de-anonymize individuals.

The anonymized dataset is available at https://zenodo.org/

record/2634598.

6.5

Review evaluation

7

Statements

After the review deadline the participants were given access to a page with

the peer-reviews (most of the time seven or eight) of their proposal. The

applicants are given the quartile rank as a letter (A-D; as calculated in Sec-

tion 6.4). For each comment, they were asked to rank its helpfulness:

Author Contributions:

We use the CRT standard (see https://

casrai.org/credit/) for reporting the author contributions:

• Conceptualization: Kerzendorf, Patat, van de Ven

We would be grateful if you could rate each review on a scale of 1 (not

helpful) to 4 (very helpful) how much this comment helps improve your

proposal (positive comments like ”best proposal I ever read” - can

be ranked as not helpful as it does not improve the proposal further).

These ratings will not be distributed further but help us for statistical

purposes.

• Data curation: Kerzendorf, Patat

• Formal Analysis: Kerzendorf, Patat

• Investigation: Kerzendorf, Patat

8



• Methodology: Kerzendorf, van de Ven, Pritchard

• Software: Kerzendorf, Bordelon

• Supervision: Kerzendorf, Patat

• Validation: Kerzendorf, Patat, van de Ven, Pritchard

• Visualization: Kerzendorf, Patat, Pritchard

• Writing original draft: Kerzendorf, Patat, Pritchard

• Writing

review & editing: Kerzendorf, Patat, van de Ven,

Pritchard

Competing Interests:

The authors declare no competing interests.


## Data Availability:


The anonymized data is available at https://

zenodo.org/record/2634598.

Andersen, M., Chiboucas, K., Geball, T., et al. 2019, in American As-

tronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 233, American Astro-

nomical Society Meeting Abstracts #233, 455.03

Ardabili, P. N., & Liu, M. 2013, CoRR, abs/1307.6528

Cohen, J. 1960, Educational and Physcological Measurement, 20, 37

Cook, W. D., Golany, B., Kress, M., Penn, M., & Raviv, T. 2005, Man-

agement Science, 51, 655

Ehrlinger, J., & Dunning, D. 2003, Journal of personality and social

psychology, 84, 5

Gallo, S. A., Sullivan, J. H., & Glisson, S. R. 2016, PLoS ONE, 11,

e0165147

Huang, C. 2013, European journal of psychology of education, 28, 1

Kerzendorf, W. E. 2019, Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy, 40,

23

Merriﬁeld, M. R., & Saari, D. G. 2009, Astronomy and Geophysics,

50, 4.16

Mervis, J. 2014a, Science, 344, 1328

—. 2014b, Science, 345, 248

Milojevi´c, S. 2013, Journal of Informetrics, 7, 767

Patat, F. 2016, The Messenger, 165, 2

—. 2018, PASP, 130, 084501

—. 2019, PASP, in preparation

Patat, F., & Hussain, G. A. J. 2013, Selecting and Scheduling Observ-

ing Programmes at ESO, ed. A. Heck, Vol. 2, 231–256

Strolger, L.-G., Porter, S., Lagerstrom, J., et al. 2017, AJ, 153, 181

Van Rooyen, S., Godlee, F., Evans, S., Black, N., & Smith, R. 1999,

Bmj, 318, 23

9



Supplementary Information



The Supplementary information is structured in the following way.

In Section 8, we described the general process of ESO Time allocation.

Section 9 gives an overview of the demographics of the experiment and

discusses self-eﬃcacy based on several criteria. Section 10 provides

further analysis of the data. Appendix A gives the exact wording of the

questions including some statistics. Appendix B provides additional

statistics for the feedback survey.

0.7

gender (this work)

gender (Patat 16)

0.6

8

Time allocation at ESO

0.5

ESO is an intergovernmental organization established in 1962, and runs

one of the largest ground-based astronomical facilities world-wide. Ev-

ery semester, about 900 proposals including more than 3000 distinct

scientists from 50 diﬀerent countries are submitted to ESO, requesting

time on a large suite of telescopes: the four 8.2 m units of the Very

Large Telescope (VLT), VISTA (4.2 m), 3.6 m, NTT (3.5 m), VST (2.6

m), and the Atacama Pathﬁnder Experiment (APEX), placed on three

diﬀerent sites in Chile. The total time request for Period 103 (the one

relevant for the DPR experiment), was about 23 000 hours. The over-

subscription rate varies with telescopes, and for the VLT is typically

around 4 (a detailed oversubscription statistics can be found at https:

//www.eso.org/sci/observing/phase1/p96/pressure.html).

The proposal review process at ESO is extensively described in

Patat & Hussain (2013), and is summarized in Patat (2018). The reader

is referred to those publications for more details. Here only a very brief

summary is given.

The members of the ESO TAC (the Observing Programmes Com-

mittee; OPC) who review the proposals are mostly nominated by the

Users Committee, in turn composed by representatives of all member

states. The nominations are reviewed by the OPC Nominating Com-

mittee, which makes a ﬁnal recommendation to the Director General.

As a rule, the panel members are required to have a minimum seniority

level, starting with scientists at their second post-doc onward. The cur-

rent implementation includes 13 Panels with 6 referees each, and cover

the four scientiﬁc categories (Cosmology; Galaxy structure and evolu-

tion; Interstellar medium, Star formation and planetary systems; Stellar

evolution). The panels are composed in such a way to maximize the ex-

pertise coverage (while also taking into account other constraints, like

aﬃliations, gender, and seniority). Although some panels are created to

cover special cases (e.g. interferometry), the proposals are distributed

randomly within the panels of a given scientiﬁc category. Institutional

conﬂicts are taken into account by the distribution software, while sci-

entiﬁc conﬂicts are declared by the referees during the initial phases of

the review.

The process is composed of two steps: 1) asynchronous at home,

and 2) synchronous face-to-face. In the ﬁrst step (which is called pre-

meeting), the proposals are assigned to 3 referees, who are asked to

review and grade the proposals using a scale from 1 to 5.1 The pre-

meeting grades are used to compile a ﬁrst rank list, and triage is ap-

plied to the bottom 30% (in time) for each telescope separately. At the

meeting, the surviving proposals are discussed and graded by all non-

conﬂicted members. The ﬁnal rank lists per telescope are compiled

based on the meeting grades, and the time is allocated following this

ﬁnal rank.

Fraction

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Male

Female

Prefer not to say

0.0

Figure 5: Gender distribution of Principal Investigators comparing this

work participants and the general community.

seniority (this work)

seniority (Patat 16)

0.4

0.3

Fraction

0.2

0.1

0.0

Less than 4 years

I don’t have my PhD yet

More than 12 years

Between 4 and 12 years

Figure 6: Career level distribution of Principal Investigators. We chose

to plot the Patat (2016) postdoc fraction for both the “less than 4 years

after PhD” and “between 4 and 12 years”. We chose the professional

astronomer category to plot over the “more than 12 years” past PhD

column.

9

Demographics of the Experiment

The participants were asked to voluntarily give feedback and statistics

about themselves and their experience in the experiment. We received

this information from 140 out of 167 ﬁnal participants.

1Before Period 102 all non-conﬂicted members of a panel (up to 6) would review all

proposals assigned to their panel. As of Period 102, in order to alleviate the work-load, this

was reduced to 3.

11



Table 1: Bootstrapped DPR r-r QAM.

Figure 5 and Figure 6 suggest that the self-selected participants

of this study are representative of the ESO community at large. The

PI gender distribution in the DPR experiment is 32.4% (F) and 67.6%

(M), to be compared to the values derived from a sample of about 3000

PIs (Patat, 2016): 29.0% (F), 71.0% (M). In terms of scientiﬁc senior-

ity, the DPR PIs are distributed as follows: 8.9% (no PhD), 18.3%

(<4 years after PhD), 33.8% (between 4 and 12 years after PhD), 39%

(more than 12 years after PhD). For the sample discussed in Patat

(2016) the distribution is: 18.7% (PhD students), 33.9% (post-docs),

47.4% (senior astronomers). Although the two studies have a diﬀerent

seniority classiﬁcation scheme, the overall comparison shows that the

DPR includes a fair amount of junior scientists, properly sampling the

underlying population.

We cannot guarantee that there are not speciﬁc attributes that lead

our participants to self-selection, but if they exist they are well hidden.

Most participants are relatively experienced submitting proposals

(see Figure 13). However, most of them have not served on a TAC (see

Figure 7).

1st referee.

2nd referee Quartile

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.33

0.26

0.24

0.18

2

0.26

0.26

0.25

0.23

3

0.24

0.25

0.25

0.26

4

0.18

0.23

0.26

0.34

Huang (2013) is a large meta-study of academic self-eﬃcacy and

shows that women tend to under-predict their performance in certain

STEM ﬁelds. Figure 8 suggests that in the domain of astrophysics,

and for post-grad individuals, the diﬀerence between the self-eﬃcacy

of men and women is relatively small.

10.2

Expertise inﬂuence on Review

An important question is whether expertise has an inﬂuence on the re-

view process itself.

Statistics shows that experts take tentatively less time to review

proposals than non-experts (see supplementary material for statistics).

We also study how expertise inﬂuences the grade distribution. Fig-

ure 9 shows that the diﬀerence in the shapes related to experts and

referees with little to no domain knowledge is relatively small. The

distributions show an extended tail towards poor grades, similarly to

what is seen in Figure 4 of Patat (2018) for the large OPC sample.

In their study on the eﬀects of reviewer expertise on the evaluation

of funding applications, Gallo et al. (2016) concluded that ”reviewers

with higher levels of self-assessed expertise tended to be harsher in

their evaluations”. That study was based on a sample of 1044 review-

ers, i.e. 6 times larger than ours. Although our data may contain some

indication of this trend, the diﬀerences are statistically marginal.

0.6

0.5

0.4

Fraction

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

10.3

Inﬂuence of gender on helpfulness of referee report

Never served

served once

served multiple times

on TAC

on TAC

on TAC

We study if gender of the referee has an inﬂuence on the helpfulness

of the comments in Figure 10 and ﬁnd that there is no statistically sig-

niﬁcant diﬀerence between the helpfulness of comments by male and

female referees. There were very few participants that used the option

”prefer not to say” on the gender question (see Figure 5). We thus did

not report the helpfulness statistics on those participants as the statisti-

cal noise is too large to draw conclusions.

Figure 7: Combined fractions from the feedback questions (see Sec-

tion A) of Have you served on another time allocation committee? and

How often have you been a panel member of the ESO Observing Pro-

grammes Committee (OPC)?

10.4

Comparison of DeepThought Distributed Peer Re-

view to the Observing Progr

10

Supplementary Analysis

We will use the concept of the quartile agreement matrix (QAM) and

related statistics as described in Section 3 of the main paper. We will

present additional statistics such as individual referee comparison in

this supplementary information.

We ﬁrst compute the agreement fractions between pairs of sub-sets

of reviews within the DPR sample. In a ﬁrst test, for each of the 172

proposals we extract a random pair of reviews, which are then used to

produce two rank-lists, from which the QAM is derived. The process

is then repeated a large number of times, leading to the construction

of an average QAM and the standard deviation matrix. Since this is

constructed for simple reviewer pairs, we will indicate it as the referee-

referee (r-r) QAM. The result is presented in Table 1 for the calibrated

grades (very similar values are obtained using the raw grades). The

typical standard deviation of single realizations is 0.06, while the un-

certainty (using poisson statistics;)on the average values is below 0.01.

The values are statistically indistinguishable from those reported in

P18 (Table 2) for the OPC sample including ∼15,000 proposals. This

10.1

Self-Eﬃcacy

The DeepThought algorithm described in this work is built to predict

domain expertise. However, domain expertise is not a measurable at-

tribute of reviewers. A close approximator might be the self-reported

domain expertise but this comes with its own biases when compared

with an actual – but immeasurable – domain knowledge. Evaluating

one’s ability to perform a task (in this case reviewing a proposal is

called self eﬃcacy). We can use our dataset to study the self eﬃcacy

of our participants before moving onto testing the DeepThought algo-

rithm against the self-reported expertise.

Seniority is expected to have an impact on expertise. Figure 8

shows that the self-reported domain expertise is signiﬁcantly lower for

junior scientists compared to senior scientists. Junior scientist, also

often suggest that they have little to no knowledge about a ﬁeld. This

might suggests that self-reported knowledge is a useful proxy for actual

knowledge.

12



0.40

Male

Female

Negative; I don’t have my PhD yet.

Less than 4 years

Between 4 and 12 years

More than 12 years

0.35

0.4

0.30

0.3

0.25

0.20

0.2

0.15

0.10

0.1

0.05

expert

general knowledge little knowledge

0.0

expert

general knowledge little knowledge

0.00

Figure 8: Left: Self-reported domain knowledge given seniority of participants. Right: Self Eﬃcacy for Male and Female reviewers.

5

5

better ←Grade →worse

better ←Grade →worse

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

best

median

worst

DeepThought Inferred Knowledge

expert

general knowledge

no knowledge

Self Reported Knowledge

Figure 9: The distribution of grades for diﬀerent groups of referees. The horizontal lines mark quartiles. Left: The distribution of grades for

the diﬀerent groups domain knowledge inferred by the DeepThought algorithm. Right: The distribution of grades for the diﬀerent groups of

self-reported domain knowledge.

shows that the average r-r agreement is identical in the two processes.

On average, the ranking lists produced by two distinct referees have

about 33% of the proposals in common in their ﬁrst and last quartiles.

This corresponds to a Cohen’s kappa coeﬃcient κ=0.11 (Cohen, 1960).

In the central quartiles the intersection is compatible with a purely ran-

dom selection. This extends to the mixed cases (i , j), with the ex-

ception of the extreme quartiles: the fraction of proposals ranked in the

ﬁrst quartile by one referee and in the fourth quartile by another referee

is ∼18%, which deviates in a statistically signiﬁcant way from the ran-

dom value (κ = −0.28). No meaningful diﬀerence is seen in the QAMs

computed for the OPC-Emulate (OE; 60 proposals) and Deep-Thought

(DT; 112 proposals) sub-samples.

As a further test, we have investigated the possible dependence on

the scientiﬁc seniority level. In the feedback questionnaire we asked

the participants to express it in terms of the years after PhD, speciﬁed

within 4 groups (0=no PhD; 1=less than 4 years; 2=between 4 and 12;

3: more than 12). Of the 167 reviewers, 136 provided this information,

which we used to divide the reviewers in two classes: junior (groups 0

and 1) and senior (groups 2 and 3). These classes roughly correspond

to PhD students plus junior post-docs (37), and advanced post-docs

plus senior scientists (99). We then computed the r-r QAM for the two

classes. The ﬁrst quartile terms are 0.22 and 0.32 for the two classes,

respectively. At face value this indicates a larger agreement between

senior reviewers. However, the small size of the junior class (37 people)

produces a signiﬁcant scatter, and therefore we do not attach too much

conﬁdence to this result.

We have deﬁned the panel-panel (p-p) agreement fraction in the

main text (see Section 3). For the OE and DT sub-samples yield sta-

tistically indistinguishable values. Finally, the numbers derived from

the bootstrap procedure fully agree with the results presented in P18

for diﬀerent panel sizes. For Nr=1, 2, and 3 the ﬁrst quartile agreement

fractions are 0.34, 0.37 and 0.41, respectively. These match (within the

noise) the corresponding P18 values (Table 8): 0.33, 0.39 and 0.45.

The conclusion is that, in terms of self-consistency, the DPR review

behaves in the same way as the pre-meeting OPC process.

10.5

The DPR-OPC agreement fraction

As anticipated, the proposals used in the DPR experiment were also

subject to the regular OPC review. This enables the comparison be-

tween the outcomes of the two selections, with the caveats outlined

above about their inherent diﬀerences.

13



Table 3: DPR-OPC (pre-meeting) p-p QAM.

P(helpful comment|gender)

DPR

OPC quartile

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.37

0.26

0.28

0.09

2

0.28

0.16

0.28

0.28

3

0.16

0.40

0.19

0.26

4

0.19

0.19

0.26

0.37

0.22

0.28

0.31

0.19

Female

Gender

Table 4: Simulated p-p QAM (top) and uncertainty (bottom) for two

panels with Nr=3 and Nr=7.

0.22

0.26

0.33

0.19

Male

1st pan.

2nd panel quartile

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.51

0.28

0.16

0.06

2

0.28

0.31

0.27

0.15

3

0.16

0.27

0.30

0.28

4

0.06

0.15

0.28

0.51

1

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.06

2

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.09

3

0.08

0.09

0.10

0.10

4

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.11

1

not helpful

2

3

4

very helpful

Review Evaluation

Figure

10:

We

show

the

conditional

probability

P(helpful comment|gender) for the various combinations of help-

ful comment rating and reported gender.

Table 2: DPR-OPC (pre-meeting) r-r QAM.

DPR ref.

OPC referee quartile

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.31

0.26

0.24

0.18

2

0.24

0.27

0.25

0.24

3

0.24

0.23

0.26

0.26

4

0.20

0.23

0.25

0.31

dures described in the previous section; or considering that the average

matrix is expected to be symmetric.

To quantify the expected noise on a single panel-panel realization,

we have run a set of simulations along the lines described in P18, which

are based on the statistical description of the reviewers and on the True

Grade Hypothesis (see P18; Section 7 therein). For the purposes of this


## analysis we modiﬁed the original code to allow the calculation of the


QAM for pairs of panels with diﬀerent sizes. We emphasize that the

P18 code was designed to simulate the OPC process, i.e. it deals with

panels reviewing the same set of proposals which, in turn, are reviewed

by all referees in the panels. It therefore does not fully reproduce the

DPR side, in which each proposal is reviewed by a virtually diﬀer-

ent panel in the DeepThought sub-sample. For this reason the results

should be considered only as indicative. More sophisticated simula-

tions will be presented elsewhere.

The outcome is presented in Table 4 (top), which also shows the

standard deviation of the single realizations (bottom). For the DPR

simulated panels we have used Nr=7, which is close to the actual aver-

age number of reviewers per proposal in the experiment. For the OPC

we have set Nr=3. The numerical calculations predict a top and bot-

tom quartile agreement of about 50%, while in the central quartiles this

drops to about 30%. The statistical signiﬁcance of the deviations of the

observed QAM from the average QAM can be quantiﬁed using the pre-

dicted dispersion. For the ﬁrst and fourth quartile, the observed value

(0.37) diﬀers at the 1.3σ-level from the average value. For the central

quartiles the diﬀerence is at the ∼1.5σ-level.

Therefore, although lower than expected on average, the observed

DPR-OPC agreement is statistically consistent with that expected from

the statistical description of the pre-meeting OPC process (P18).

One important aspect to remark is that, given the large noise inher-

ent to the process, a much larger data-set (or more realizations of the

experiment) would be required to reach a statistical signiﬁcance suﬃ-

ciently high to make robust claims about systematic deviations.

For a ﬁrst test we used a bootstrap procedure in which, for each

proposal included in the DPR, we randomly extracted one evaluation

from the DPR (typically one out of 7) and one from the OPC (one out

of 3), forming two ranking lists from which a QAM was computed.

The operation was repeated a large number of times and the average

and standard deviation matrices were constructed. This approach pro-

vides a direct indication of the DPR-OPC agreement at the r-r level,

and overcomes the problem that the two reviews have a diﬀerent num-

ber of evaluations per proposal (see below). The result is presented in

Table 2. The typical standard deviation of single realizations from the

average is 0.06.

This matrix is very similar to that derived within the DPR reviews

(Table 1), possibly indicating a DPR-OPC r-r agreement slightly lower

than the corresponding DPR-DPR. A check run on the two sub-samples

for the junior and senior DPR reviewers (according to the classiﬁcation

described in the previous section) has given statistically indistinguish-

able results.

As explained in the introduction, the proposals were reviewed by

Nr=3 OPC referees in the pre-meeting phase. This constitutes a signiﬁ-

cant diﬀerence, in that the DPR ranking is typically based on ∼7 grades,

whilst the pre-meeting OPC ranking rests on 3 grades only. With this

caveat in mind, one can nevertheless compute the QAM for the two

overall ranking lists.

The result (computed using calibrated grades) is presented in Ta-

ble 3. At face value, about 37% of the proposals ranked in the 1st

quartile by the DPR were ranked in the same quartile by the OPC, with

a similar fraction for the bottom quartile. When looking at these val-

ues, one needs to consider that this is only one realization, which is

aﬀected by a large scatter, as one can deduce from the comparatively

large ﬂuctuations in the QAM. These are evident when comparing, for

instance, to the average values obtained from the bootstrapping proce-

10.6

Comparison with the post-meeting outcome

The fact that in the real OPC process there is a face-to-face meeting

constitutes the most pronounced diﬀerence between the two review

schemes. In the meeting, the opinions of single reviewers are changed

14



A

Feedback questionnaire

Table 5: OPC Quartile Migration Matrix

The following is the multiple choice questions that were presented to

the participants in the questionnaire at the end of the experiment. The

bold numbers after the multiple choice answers are the number of the

participants that selected this answer.

OPC pre-m.

OPC post-meeting quartile (N=683)

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.64

0.25

0.06

0.05

2

0.26

0.37

0.28

0.08

3

0.08

0.26

0.39

0.26

4

0.02

0.11

0.25

0.62

DPR sub-set (N=136)

1

0.56

0.32

0.12

0.00

2

0.32

0.32

0.29

0.06

3

0.12

0.26

0.38

0.24

4

0.00

0.09

0.21

0.71

A.1

What is your gender?

• Male 96

• Female 46

• Prefer not to say 5

• (no answer given) 0

Table 6: DPR vs. OPC post-meeting QAM

A.2

How many years are you after your PhD?

DPR

OPC post-meeting quartile (N=136)

quartile

1

2

3

4

1

0.26

0.38

0.24

0.12

2

0.24

0.35

0.24

0.18

3

0.32

0.12

0.29

0.26

4

0.19

0.15

0.24

0.44

• Negative; I don’t have my PhD yet. 12

• Less than 4 years 27

• Between 4 and 12 years 51

• More than 12 years 57

• (no answer given) 0

by the discussion, so that the grades attributed by the single referees

are not completely independent from each other (as opposed to the pre-

meeting phase, in which the possible correlation should depend only

on the intrinsic merits of the proposal).

A.3

How many proposals have you submitted to ESO as PI

in the past?

• None; this is my ﬁrst proposal as PI. 0

The eﬀects of the meeting can be quantiﬁed in terms of the quartile

agreement fractions between the pre- and post-meeting outcomes, as

outlined in Patat (2019, hereafter P19). Based on the P18 sample, P19

concludes that the change is signiﬁcant: on average, only 75% of the

proposals ranked in the top quartile before the meeting remain in the

top quartile after the discussion (about 20% are demoted to the second

quartile, and 5% to the third quartile). P19 characterizes this eﬀect in-

troducing the Quartile Migration Matrix (QMM). For the speciﬁc case

of P103, the QMM is reported in Table 5 for the 683 proposals that

passed the triage (top), and for the sub-set of the DPR experiment (bot-

tom).2

• Less than 3 proposals 14

• Between 3 and 10 proposals 55

• More than 10 proposals 78

• (no answer given) 0

A.4

How often have you been a panel member of the ESO

Observing Programmes Committee (OPC)?

As anticipated, the eﬀect of the discussion is very pronounced. In

the light of these facts one can ﬁnally inspect the QAM between the

DPR and the ﬁnal outcome of the OPC process. This is presented in

Table 6. With the only possible exception of M4,4, which indicates a rel-

atively marked agreement for the proposals in the bottom quartile, the

two reviews appear to be almost completely uncorrelated. By means

of simple Monte-Carlo calculations one can show that for two fully

aleatory panels the standard deviation of a single realization around

the average value (0.25) is 0.10. Therefore, the majority of the Mi,j

elements in Table 6 are consistent with a stochastic process at the 1σ

level.

• Never; I have not yet been on the OPC. 112

• I am currently and OPC panel member. 3

• I served as OPC panel member for one term. 12

• I served more than one term on the OPC. 20

• (no answer given) 0

A.5

How easy was it to navigate and use the interface to

review the proposals?

The main conclusion is that while the pre-meeting agreement is

consistent with the DPR and OPC reviewers behaving in a very similar

way (in terms of r-r and p-p agreements), the face-to-face meeting has

the eﬀect of signiﬁcantly increasing the discrepancy between the two

processes. We remark that the sample is relatively small, and therefore

the results are signiﬁcantly aﬀected by noise.

• Easy, no problems in usage 117

• Mostly easy; some improvements possible 28

• Rather diﬃcult; some improvements needed 2

• Diﬃcult; several problems in usage 0

2Of the initial 172 proposals included in the DPR sample, 36 were triaged out in the

OPC process.

• (no answer given) 0

15



A.6

How much time did you spend, on average, per pro-

posal (including writing comments)?

A.11

How clear and appropriate were the comments that

you received on your proposal?

• Less than 15 minutes 0

• Fully; overall the comments were clear and appropriate 36

• Between 15 and 30 minutes 41

• Mostly; some comments were not fully clear but mostly appropri-

ate 72

• Between 30 and 45 minutes 62

• Over 45 minutes 44

• Somewhat; several comments were unclear or not fully appropri-

ate 36

• (no answer given) 0

• Not; several comments were unclear and inappropriate 3

A.7

Was the time spent for proposals for which you are an

expert versus a non-expert diﬀerent?

• (no answer given) 0

• More time on proposals for which I am an expert 15

A.12

How do these raw comments compare to the edited

comments from the OPC in the past?

• About the same 62

• Less time on proposals for which I am an expert 69

• These raw comments were better; the OPC edited comments were

less helpful. 62

• (no answer given) 1

• Of similar quality 66

A.8

How appropriate were the assessment criteria to eval-

uate the proposals?

• These raw comments were less helpful; the OPC edited comments

were better. 18

• Fully appropriate; the criteria were clear and easy to apply 53

• Mostly appropriate; the criteria were clear but not easy to apply

73

• Not applicable; I have not received OPC edited comments before.

1

• Somewhat appropriate; the criteria can be clariﬁed but were ap-

plicable 18

• (no answer given) 0

• Not appropriate; the criteria should be changed 2

A.13

For which types of proposals do you think distributed

peer review would be beneﬁcial? (multiple answers

possible)

• (no answer given) 1

A.9

How satisfactorily were you able to evaluate the pro-

posals for which you were a non-expert?

• Short proposals, with total requested time less than 20 hours 0

• Regular proposals, with total requested time between 1 and 100

hours 0

• Fully; I could evaluate well and fairly as a non-expert 3

• Mostly; I sometimes missed the expertise but was still able to eval-

uate fairly 53

• Large proposals, with total requested time more than 100 hours 0

• Somewhat; I struggled and might not always have been able to

evaluate fairly 75

• None 0

• (no answer given) 4

• Not satisfactorily; I might have unintentionally provided an unfair

evaluation 16

A.14

The ESO Time Allocation Working Group recom-

mended to introducein addition to the existing calls

for proposalsa ’Fast Track’ channel with a fraction

of the time allocated through (two) monthly calls. If

implemented, would distributed peer review be ap-

propriate for this time allocation? (multiple answers

possible)

• (no answer given) 0

A.10

How useful were the comments that you received on

your proposal?

• Fully; overall the comments will allow me to improve my pro-

posed project 17

• Mostly; several comments will help me to strengthen my proposed

project 70

• I would support distributed peer review being used for the ’Fast

Track’ calls. 105

• Somewhat; some comments might help me to strengthen my pro-

posed project 53

• I have concerns with distributed peer review being used for the

’Fast Track’ calls. 23

• Not useful; the comments will not help me to improve my pro-

posed project 6

• I am indiﬀerent. 19

• (no answer given) 1

• (no answer given) 0

16



A.15

Securing conﬁdentiality in the process:

0.7

gender (this work)

gender (Patat 16)

• I am neither more nor less concerned about conﬁdentiality issues

in the DPR process than in the OPC process. 73

0.6

• I am more concerned about conﬁdentiality issues in the DPR pro-

cess than in the OPC process. 42

0.5

Fraction

• I am less concerned about conﬁdentiality issues in the DPR pro-

cess than in the OPC process. 8

0.4

0.3

• I have no strong opinion on this point. 24

0.2

• (no answer given) 0

0.1

A.16

External expertise in the review process:

• I think that the pool of eight peer reviewers (including some non-

experts) are suﬃcient to assess the proposals. 43

Male

Female

Prefer not to say

0.0

• I think that the pool of eight peer reviewers are suﬃcient to assess

the proposals, provided that they have some expertise in the ﬁeld.

73

Figure 11: The referee was asked the question What is your gender?

• I think that external experts (non-ESO facility users) are critical to

the assessment of the proposals and must be added as reviewers.

22

seniority (this work)

seniority (Patat 16)

0.4

• I have no strong opinion on this point. 8

0.3

Fraction

• (no answer given) 1

0.2

A.17

Robustness of the review process against any biases:

• I think that DPR review process is as robust against biases as the

OPC review process. 38

0.1

• I think that DPR review process is more robust against biases than

the OPC review process. 39

0.0

Less than 4 years

I don’t have my PhD yet

More than 12 years

Between 4 and 12 years

• I think that DPR review process is less robust against biases than

the OPC review process. 25

• I have no strong opinion on this point. 43

Figure 12: The referee was asked the question How many years are you

after your PhD?

• (no answer given) 2

B

Feedback questions statistics and overview

0.5

Statistics ﬁgures of the feedback overview.

0.4

Fraction

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Less than 3

Between 3 and 10

More than 10

proposals

proposals

proposals

Figure 13: The referee was asked the question How many proposals

have you submitted to ESO as PI in the past?

17



0.8

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

Fraction

Fraction

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.0

Never; I

have not yet

I served as

OPC panel

member for

I served

more than

one term on

I am

currently

and OPC

0.0

Easy, no

problems in

Mostly easy;

Rather

diﬃcult; some

improvements

been on the

some

improvements

OPC.

one term.

the OPC.

panel

member

usage

possible

needed

Figure 14: The referee was asked the question How often have you

been a panel member of the ESO Observing Programmes Committee

(OPC)?

Figure 16: The referee was asked the question How easy was it to

navigate and use the interface to review the proposals?

0.45

0.4

0.40

0.35

0.3

0.30

Fraction

Fraction

0.25

0.2

0.20

0.1

0.15

0.10

0.0

0.05

This is my ﬁrst

I have served on

I have served on

experience

a time

allocation

committee

multiple time

Over 45 minutes

0.00

reviewing

observing

proposals.

allocation

committees for

Between 15 and

Between 30 and

30 minutes

45 minutes

before.

various

facilities

Figure 17: The referee was asked the question How much time did you

spend, on average, per proposal (including writing comments)?

Figure 15: The referee was asked the question Have you served on

another time allocation committee?

18



0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

Fraction

0.3

0.3

Fraction

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

Not satisfac

Somewhat; I

Mostly; I

sometimes

missed the

Fully; I

torily; I

might have u

struggled

and might

not always

could

evaluate

well and

fairly as a

non-expert

0.0

Less time on

proposals for

which I am an

About the same

More time on

nintentional

expertise

proposals for

which I am an

ly provided

have been

but was

still able

to evaluate

an unfair

evaluation

able to

evaluate

expert

expert

Figure 18: The referee was asked the question Was the time spent for

proposals for which you are an expert versus a non-expert diﬀerent?

Figure 20: The referee was asked the question How satisfactorily were

you able to evaluate the proposals for which you were a non-expert?

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

Fraction

0.3

Fraction

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

Not useful;

the comments

Somewhat;

Mostly;

Fully;

overall the

comments

some

comments

might help

several

comments

will help me

will not

help me to

improve my

0.0

Not

appropriate;

Mostly

appropriate;

Fully

appropriate;

Somewhat

appropriate;

will allow

me to

strengthen

my proposed

to

strengthen

my proposed

me to

improve my

the criteria

the criteria

the criteria

the criteria

proposed

should be

were clear

but not easy

were clear

and easy to

can be

clariﬁed

but were

project

proposed

changed

project

project

project

to apply

apply

li

bl

Figure 19: The referee was asked the question How appropriate were

the assessment criteria to evaluate the proposals?

Figure 21: The referee was asked the question How useful were the

comments that you received on your proposal?

19



0.30

0.5

0.25

0.4

0.20

0.3

Fraction

Fraction

0.15

0.2

0.10

0.1

0.05

0.0

Not; several

Somewhat;

Mostly; some

Fully;

overall the

comments

None

0.00

comments

were unclear

and inapprop

several

comments

were unclear

comments

Short

Regular

Large

Short,

Regular

Regular,

Short,

Regular,

were not

fully clear

but mostly

appropriate

Large

were clear

Large

riate

or not fully

appropriate

and

appropriate

Figure 24: The referee was asked the question For which types of pro-

posals do you think distributed peer review would be beneﬁcial?

Figure 22: The referee was asked the question How clear and appro-

priate were the comments that you received on your proposal?

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.5

Fraction

0.4

0.3

Fraction

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

These raw

comments

were better;

Of similar

These raw

comments

Not

applicable;

I would support

distributed peer

I am

indiﬀerent.

I have concerns

with distributed

quality

were less

helpful; the

OPC edited

I have not

received OPC

review being

peer review

being used for

the ’Fast Track’

the OPC

used for the

’Fast Track’

edited

comments

edited

comments

comments

were better.

calls

calls

were less

before.

helpful.

Figure 25: The referee was asked the question The ESO Time Alloca-

tion Working Group recommended to introducein addition to the ex-

isting calls for proposalsa ’Fast Track’ channel with a fraction of the

time allocated through (two) monthly calls. If implemented, would dis-

tributed peer review be appropriate for this time allocation?

Figure 23: The referee was asked the question How do these raw com-

ments compare to the edited comments from the OPC in the past?

20



0.4

Fraction

0.2

0.0

I am less

concerned

about conﬁd

I am neither

I am more

concerned

about conﬁd

I have no

more nor

strong

opinion on

this point.

less

concerned

about conﬁd

entiality

issues in

the DPR

process than

entiality

issues in

the DPR

process than

entiality

issues in

the DPR

process than

in the OPC

in the OPC

process.

process.

in the OPC

process.

0.3

Figure 26: The referee was asked the question Securing conﬁdentiality

in the process:

Fraction

0.2

0.1

0.0

I think that

DPR review

I think that

DPR review

I think that

DPR review

I have no

strong

opinion on

this point.

process is

more robust

process is

process is

less robust

as robust

against

biases than

against

biases as

the OPC

against

biases than

the OPC

the OPC

review

process.

review

process.

review

process.

0.4

Figure 28: The referee was asked the question Robustness of the review

process against any biases:

Fraction

0.2

0.0

I think that

I think that

I think that

I have no

the pool of

the pool of

external

strong

opinion on

this point.

eight peer

eight peer

experts

(non-ESO

reviewers

reviewers

(including

some non-

experts) are

are

suﬃcient

to assess

facility

users) are

critical to

the

proposals,

suﬃcient

to assess

the

assessment

provided

that they

have some

the

proposals.

of the

proposals

Figure 27: The referee was asked the question External expertise in the

review process:

21