International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Updating Weight Values for

Function Point Counting

Wei Xia1, Danny Ho2, Luiz Fernando Capretz3, *, Faheem Ahmed4

1HSBC Bank Canada, IT Department, Vancouver, Canada

2NFA Estimation Inc., London, Canada

3University of Western Ontario, Dept. Electrical & Computer Engineering, London, Canada

4United Arab Emirates University, College of Information Technology, Al-Ain, U.A.E

*corresponding author – lcapretz@eng.uwo.ca


## Abstract


While software development productivity has grown rapidly, the weight

values assigned to count standard Function Point (FP) created at IBM

twenty-five years ago have never been updated. This obsolescence raises critical

questions about the validity of the weight values; it also creates other problems

such as ambiguous classification, crisp boundary, as well as subjective and

locally defined weight values. All of these challenges reveal the need to calibrate

FP in order to reflect both the specific software application context and the trend

of today’s software development techniques more accurately. We have created a

FP calibration model that incorporates the learning ability of neural networks as

well as the capability of capturing human knowledge using fuzzy logic. The

empirical validation using ISBSG Data Repository (release 8) shows an average

improvement of 22% in the accuracy of software effort estimations with the new

calibration.

Index Terms

Function point analysis, software size measure, effort prediction model,

software estimation



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061


## 1. INTRODUCTION


Accurate software estimation is a crucial part of any software project so that the project

can be priced adequately and resources allocated appropriately. If the management

underestimates the actual cost, the organization can lose money on the project, or even

worse an inaccurate estimation can ruin a small software company. Conversely, if the

management overestimates, the client may decide that, on the basis of cost-benefit analysis

or return of investment, there is no point in having the software built. Alternatively, the

client may contract another company whose estimate is more reasonable. Additionally, the

client certainly wants to know when the project will be delivered, if the management is

unable to keep to its schedule, then at best the organization loses credibility, at worst

penalty clauses  are invoked. In all cases, the managers responsible for the software

estimation have a lot of explaining to do. Hence it is clear that accurate software estimation

is vital.

Therefore, many models for estimating software development effort have been

proposed: COCOMO [1, 2], SLIM [3], and Function Point (FP) [4] are arguably the most

popular. These models can be considered algorithmic models, that is, pre-specified

formulas for estimating development efforts that are calibrated from historical data.

COCOMO and SLIM assume Source Lines of Code (SLOC) as a major input. FP, however,

is based on higher-level features of a software project, such as the size of files, the types of

transactions, and the number of reports; these features facilitate estimation early in the

software life cycle.

Algorithmic effort prediction models are limited by their inability to cope with

vagueness and imprecision in the early stages of the software life cycle. Although software

engineering has been influenced by a number of ideas from different fields [5], software

estimation models combining algorithmic models with machine learning approaches, such

as neural networks and fuzzy logic, have been viewed with scepticism by the majority of

software managers [6].

Srinivasan and Fisher [7] illustrate a neural network learning approach to estimating

software development effort known as Back-propagation. They indicate possible

advantages of the approach relative to traditional models, but also point out limitations that

motivate continued research. Furthermore, MacDonell [8] also considers the applicability



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

of fuzzy logic modelling methods to the task of software source code sizing, and suggests

that fuzzy predictive models can outperform their traditional regression-based counterparts,

particularly with refinement using data and knowledge. Ahmed, Saliu and AlGhamdi [9]

discuss an adaptive fuzzy logic framework for software effort prediction that incorporates

experts’ knowledge; they demonstrate the capabilities of the framework through empirical

validation carried out on artificial data sets and on the COCOMO public database of

completed projects. Xu and Khoshgoftaar [10] present a fuzzy identification cost

estimation modeling technique to deal with linguistic data and automatically generate

fuzzy membership functions and rules; they report that their model provides a method of

cost estimation that is significantly better than COCOMO.

Briefly, neural network techniques are based on the principle of learning from historical


## data, whereas fuzzy logic is a method used to make rational decisions in an environment of


uncertainty and vagueness. However, fuzzy logic alone does not enable learning from the

historical database of software projects. Once the concept of fuzzy logic is incorporated

into the neural network, the result is a neuro-fuzzy system that combines the advantages of

both techniques.

Neuro-fuzzy cost estimation models are more appropriate when uncertainties and

imprecise information are accounted for. Huang et al. [11] present a general framework

that combines neuro-fuzzy techniques with algorithmic approaches, and show that such a

combination can result in an average improvement of 15% for software estimation

accuracy. Huang et al. [12] used a neuro-fuzzy approach as a front-end to COCOMO, this

combination yielded better estimation results than COCOMO alone. The research

presented in this paper extends that general framework to FP counting method.

FP is a metric of measuring software size that was first proposed by Albrecht [4] at IBM

in 1979. The introduction of FP represented a major step in comparison with SLOC

counting, because FP focuses on system “functionality” rather than on calculating SLOC.

Based on the FP theory, other variations, such as International FP Users Group (IFPUG)

[13], COSMIC [14], and Mark II [15] were created.

Research on the combination of the machine learning approach with FP was conducted

by Finnie, Wittig and Desharnais [16], who compared three estimation techniques using FP

as an estimate of system size. The models considered are based on regression analysis,



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

artificial neural networks and case-based reasoning. Although regression models

performed poorly on the given data set, the authors observed that both artificial neural

networks and case-based reasoning appeared to be valuable for software estimation models.

Hence, they concluded that case-based reasoning is appealing because of its similarity to

the expert judgement approach and for its potential in supporting human judgement.

Additionally, Yau and Tsoi [17] introduced a fuzzified FP analysis model to help

software size estimators express their judgment and use the fuzzy B-spline membership

function to derive their assessment values. Their weakness involved the used of limited

in-house software, which significantly limits the validation of their model. Lima, Farias

and Belchior [18] also proposed the application of concepts and properties from the fuzzy

set theory in order to perform fuzzy FP analysis; a prototype that automates the calculation

of FPs using the fuzzified model was created. However, as in the case of Yau and Tsoi [17],

the calibration was done using a small database comprised of legacy systems, developed

mainly in Natural-2, Microsoft Access and Microsoft Visual Basic, a fact which limits the

generality of their work.

A new FP weight system using an artificial neural network was established by Al-Hajri

et al. [19]. Their research was similar to ours in the fact that they also used the data set

provided by the International Software Benchmarking Standards Group (ISBSG) in order

to validate their model. In their work, they replaced the original complexity table with a

new table gathered with the training methods from neural networks. Although their results

are quite accurate, the correlation is still unsatisfactory due to the wide variation of data

points with many outliers.

Previous research projects have indicated that the combination of machine learning

approaches and algorithmic models yields a more accurate prediction of software costs and

effort, which is competitive with traditional algorithmic estimators. However, our

proposed neuro-fuzzy model goes even further: it is a unique combination of statistical


## analysis, neural networks and fuzzy logic. Specifically, we obtained an equation from


statistical analysis, defined a suite of fuzzy sets to represent human judgement, and used a

neural network to learn from a comprehensive historical database of software projects.

First, we will briefly introduce the theory of function points, and then in the next section,

we will illustrate its weaknesses and limitations.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

FP Analysis is a process used to calculate software functional size. Currently, the most

pervasive version is regulated in the Counting Practices Manual - version 4.2, which was

released by the International Function Point User Group (IFPUG) [13]. Counting FP

requires the identification of five types of functional components: Internal Logical Files

(ILF), External Interface Files (EIF), External Inputs (EI), External Outputs (EO) and

External Inquiries (EQ). Each functional component is classified as a certain complexity

based on its associated file numbers such as Data Element Types (DET), File Types


## Referenced (FTR) and Record Element Types (RET). The complexity matrices for the five


components are shown in Table I. Table II illustrates how each function component is then

assigned a weight according to its complexity. The Unadjusted Function Point (UFP) is

calculated with Equation 1, where Wij are the complexity weights and Zij are the counts for

each function component.

5

3

∑∑

=

=

⋅

=

1

i

j

Wij

Zij

UFP

Equation 1

1

Table I - COMPLEXITY MATRIX FOR FP FUNCTION COMPONENTS

ILF/EIF

DET

EI



DET

EO/EQ

DET

RET

1-19

20-50

51+

FTR

1-4

5-15

16+

FTR

1-5

6-19

20+

1

Low

Low

Avg

0-1

Low

Low

Avg

0-1

Low

Low

Avg

2-5

Low

Avg

High

2

Low

Avg

High

2-3

Low

Avg

High

6+

Avg

High

High

3+

Avg

High

High

4+

Avg

High

High

Table II - FUNCTION COMPONENT COMPLEXITY WEIGHT ASSIGNMENT

Component

Low

Average

High

External Inputs

3

4

6

External Outputs

4

5

7

External Inquiries

3

4

6

Internal Logical Files

7

10

15

External Interface Files

5

7

10



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Once calculated, UFP is multiplied by a Value Adjustment Factor (VAF), which takes

into account the supposed contribution of technical and quality requirements. The VAF is

calculated from 14 General System Characteristics (GSC), using Equation 2; the GSC

includes the characteristics used to evaluate the overall complexity of the software.

14

∑

=

+

=

1

01

.0

65

.0

i

Ci

VAF

Equation 2

where Ci is the Degree of Influence (DI) rating of each GSC.

Finally, an FP is calculated by the multiplication of UFP and VAF, as expressed in

Equation 3.

VAF

UFP

FP

×

=

Equation 3

Despite its well recognized usefulness as software metric, FP has its own drawbacks and

weaknesses. The next section expands on these difficulties, particularly the problems with

the current FP complexity weight systems. Section 3 proposes a FP calibration model,

termed the neuro-fuzzy FP (NFFP) model, which overcomes those problems. In section 4

we describe the experimental methodology and discuss the results of performance

evaluation, the reliability and validity of the proposed model. Finally, the last section

summarizes the conclusions of this work.


## 2. PROBLEMS WITH THE FP COMPLEXITY WEIGHT SYSTEM


The FP complexity weight system refers to all the complexity calculations and weight

values expressed in FP. Five problems with the FP complexity weight system are identified.

Problems 1 and 2 are rooted in the classification of the UFP, whereas problems 3, 4 and 5

arise from the weight values of UFP.

2.1. Problem 1: Ambiguous Complexity Classification

Each of the five FP function components (ILF, EIF, EI, EO and EQ) is classified as low,

average or high, according to the complexity matrices that are based on the counts of each

component’s associated files, such as DET, RET and FTR. Such complexity classification

is easy to perform, but the categorization itself can be ambiguous. For example, Table III



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

shows a software project with two ILF, A and B. Both A and B have 3 RET, but A has 50

DET while B has 20 DET. According to the complexity matrix, both A and B are classified

as having the same complexity and are assigned the identical weight value of 10. However,

A has 30 more DET than B and is therefore more complex. Despite their difference, they

are assigned the same complexity weight, thus exposing the problem of ambiguous

classification.

2.2. Problem 2: Crisp Boundary in Complexity Classification

The boundary between two different complexity classifications is very crisp. An

example is given in Table III, where one software project has two ILF, B and C. Both B and

C have 3 RET, but B has 20 DET, while C has 19 DET. B is classified as average by the

complexity matrix and assigned a weight of 10, whereas C is classified as low and assigned

a weight of 7. B has only one more DET than C and they both have the same number of

RET. However, B has been classified as average and assigned three more weight units than

C, because the boundary between B and C is very crisp with no smooth transition between

the values.

Table III - PROBLEM 1(AMBIGUOUS CLASSIFICATION) AND PROBLEM 2 (CRISP BOUNDARY)

ILF A

ILF B

ILF C

DET

50

20

19

RET

3

3

3

Complexity Classification

Average

Average

Low

Weight Value

10

10

7

Problem 1

Ambiguous Classification

Problem 2



Crisp Boundary

2.3. Problem 3: Weight Values Obsolete

The weight values of unadjusted FP [4] are said to reflect the size of the software. They

have never been updated since being introduced in 1979 and are applied universally. In

contrast, software development methods have evolved steadily since 1979, but today’s

software differs drastically from what it was over two decades ago. Such an imbalance



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

prompts the question: "Are these weight values are still applicable to today’s software or

whether are they obsolete?"

2.4. Problem 4: Weight Values Defined Subjectively

The weight values of unadjusted FP were determined by Albrecht by “debate and trial”

[4], based on his experience and knowledge. Albrecht contributed significantly to the

theory of FP; nevertheless, with no actual follow-up projects to justify his values, the

question remains as to whether the weight values were defined subjectively without

convincing support or whether they reflect objective data.

2.5. Problem 5: Weight Values Defined Locally

The weight values of unadjusted FP were decided based on the study of data processing

systems at IBM. The assignment of weight values was restricted to only one organization

and to only a limited amount of software types; however, this set of weight values is

applied universally and is not limited to one organization or one type of software. Thus,

one cannot be sure if weight values that were defined locally can be applied on a global

basis.

2.6. Remarks on the Encountered Problems

The existing weight system of FP does not measure complexity perfectly. Problems 1

and 2 do not fully reflect software complexity under a specific application context; they

definitely need calibration. Problems 3, 4 and 5 do not reflect the trends of today’s software

and need further calibration as well. In an attempt to address these problems, this paper

proposes a novel FP calibration model.


## 3. FP CALIBRATION MODEL USING NEURO-FUZZY


In introducing the new FP calibration model, called a neuro-fuzzy FP (NFFP) model, we

have three main objectives: to improve the FP complexity weight system, to calibrate the

weight values of the unadjusted FP and to produce a calibrated FP count for more accurate

measurements.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

3.1. Technical View of the Model

The neuro-fuzzy FP model is a unique approach that incorporates FP measurements with

the neural networks, fuzzy logic and statistical regression techniques; a technical view of

this model is depicted in Figure 1. The first component, statistical regression, is a

mathematical technique used to represent the relationship between selected values and

observed values from the statistical data. Secondly, the neural network technique is based

on the principle of learning from previous data. This neural network is trained with a series

of inputs and desired outputs from the training data so as to minimize the prediction error

[20]. Once the training is complete and the appropriate weights for the network links are

determined, new inputs are presented to the neural network to predict the corresponding

estimation of the response variable.

The final component of our model, fuzzy logic, is a technique used to make rational

decisions in an environment of uncertainty and imprecision [21], [22]. It is rich in its

capability to represent the human linguistic ability with the terms of fuzzy set, fuzzy

membership function, fuzzy rules, and the fuzzy inference process [23]. Once the concept

of fuzzy logic is incorporated into the neural network, the result is a neuro-fuzzy system

that combines the advantages of both techniques [24].

Statistical Regression

Neuro-Fuzzy

Function Points

Function Points

Neural Networks

Fuzzy Logic

Figure 1 - Overview of the FP Calibration Model

3.2. Layered Architecture

The neuro-fuzzy FP model consists of three layers: the input, processing and output



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

layers. A block diagram of this model is illustrated in Figure 2.

a) Input layer: The input layer of the model consists of the pre-defined fuzzy

complexity measurement system based on experts’ experience, which is subjective

knowledge, and the project data provided by ISBSG [25],considered to be objective

knowledge. The pre-defined system produces an exact complexity degree for each

function component of FP. The project data imported in this layer is used to extract an

estimation equation by means of the statistical regression technique and to train the

neural network in the processing layer.

b) Processing layer: An equation that estimates work effort is derived in the processing

layer by analyzing the project data imported from the input layer using a statistical

regression technique. The equation is then applied in the neural network as an activation

function. Also, the neural network learning block calibrates the weight values of

unadjusted FP by learning from the historical project data.

c) Output layer: The calibrated weight values of unadjusted FP (UFP) are generated

from the neural-network learning block. They are used in the output layer to adjust the

parameters of the pre-defined fuzzy complexity measurement system, producing an

adjusted fuzzy complexity measurement system. The pre-defined and the post-tuned

(adjusted) fuzzy measurement system combine to form the fuzzy logic component of

the model.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Input Layer

Processing Layer

Output Layer

Regression

Objective Knowledge

Equation

Project Data

Calibrated Weights

Project   Data

Values of UFP

Neural

Network

Learning

Post-tuned Fuzzy

Pre-defined Fuzzy

Measurement

System

Measurement

System

Subjective Knowledge

Figure 2 - Layered Architecture of FP Calibration Model

3.3. Fuzzy Complexity Measurement System

The fuzzy part of the neuro-fuzzy FP model is composed of two fuzzy complexity

measurement systems: the pre-defined system in the input layer and the adjusted system in

the output layer. The two fuzzy systems share the same structure, but the pre-defined

system uses the original unadjusted FP weight values whereas the adjusted system uses the

calibrated weight values. Using fuzzy logic in a comprehensive way produces an exact

complexity degree of each FP component with the associated file numbers and overcomes

Problems 1 and 2 by obtaining a more precise categorization.

As mentioned in the first section, the five FP function components are classified

according to the complexity matrices. The inputs in the original weight matrices are the

numbers of files associated with each function component, and the output is the

component’s complexity classification: low, average or high.

We define three new linguistic terms: small, medium and large, to express the inputs

qualitatively. For example, if an ILF has one RET, we assume that the ILF’s RET input is



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

small. Similarly, if an EI has six DETs, we assume that EI’s DET input is medium. Also,

we use the linguistic terms low, average and high for the output, which is the same as the

original matrices. For example, the linguistic terms of low, average, and high are used to

describe the weight values of 7, 10 and 15 of ILF respectively. Thus, the linguistic terms

defined are consistent with the original complexity matrices. We unified all of the

complexity matrices for the five FP components to one equivalent linguistic complexity

matrix shown in Table IV.

Table IV - LINGUISTIC COMPLEXITY MATRIX

Input 1

Input 2

Small

Medium

Large

Small

Low

Low

Average

Medium

Low

Average

High

Large

Average

High

High

The fuzzy sets are defined to represent the linguistic terms in the complexity matrix.

Each input and output in the linguistic complexity matrix is represented by a fuzzy set

named after its linguistic term. The membership grade is captured through the membership

functions of each fuzzy set. There are several basic types of fuzzy membership functions

[24]; the trapezoidal and the triangular types of membership functions are selected because

the complexity increases linearly with the file numbers and also because these types of

membership functions are appropriate in preserving the values. The inputs are of the

trapezoidal type and the outputs are of the triangular type. Since all of the original

complexity matrices are now unified to the linguistic complexity matrix (Table IV), all the

inputs and outputs of the five FP function components can be represented by fuzzy sets.

The five components share the same fuzzy set structure but have different parameters in

fuzzy membership functions; the parameters are assigned to make the boundary more

gradual according to the original complexity matrices.

An example of the complexity matrix for ILF/EIF is given to illustrate the fuzzy set

structure and the definition of parameters. As illustrated in Figure 3(a), the inputs of DET



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

and RET are represented in the fuzzy sets of small, medium, and large, and Table V shows

the parameters of the membership functions. The parameters a, b, c, and d (a<b≤ c<d)

determine the coordinates of the trapezoid, where a and d locate the “feet” of the trapezoid,

and b and c locate the “shoulders”. Figure 3(b) shows the outputs of the complexity matrix

of ILF/EIF that are represented in the fuzzy sets of low, average, and high, and Table V

demonstrates the parameters of the fuzzy membership functions. The parameters a, b, and c

(a<b<c) define the coordinates of the triangle, where a and c locate the “feet” of the

triangle, and b locates the “peak”. Using a similar method, we can define the fuzzy sets for

the remaining function components (EI, EO and EQ) and fuzzify all of the inputs and

outputs in the FP complexity weight matrices.

The fuzzy inference process using the Mamdani approach [26] is applied based on the

fuzzy sets and rules. For each fuzzy rule, we apply the minimum method to evaluate the

“AND” operation and obtain the antecedent result as a single number. The antecedent of

each rule implies the consequence using the minimum method. All of the consequences are

aggregated to an output fuzzy set using the maximum method. Eventually, the output fuzzy

set is defuzziﬁed to a single number using the centroid calculation method, which takes the

center of gravity of the final fuzzy space and produces a clear output value.

(a) Inputs Fuzzy Sets (Trapezoidal)                                  (b) Output Fuzzy Sets (Triangular)

Figure 3 - Neuro-Fuzzy FP Model Fuzzy Sets



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Table V - NEURO-FUZZY FP MODEL FUZZY SETS PARAMETERS

Input1

Small

Medium  Large

Input2

Small

Medium  Large

Output

Low  Average  High

a

0

15

45

a

0

0

4

A

7

7

10

b

0

25

55

b

0

2

6

B

7

10

15

c

15

45

70

c

1

4

10

C

10

15

15

d

25

55

70

d

2

6

10

3.3.1. Problems Tackled with the Proposed Approach

If we apply our method to the previous examples illustrating the FP complexity

Problems 1 and 2, we obtain three weight values that are much more accurate. Table VI

shows the original weight values and the fuzzy weight values of ILF A, B and C, therefore

demonstrating that the new fuzzy weight values solve both Problem 1 (ambiguous

classification) and Problem 2 (crisp boundary).

Table VI - PROBLEMS SOLVED USING FUZZY LOGIC

ILF A

ILF B

ILF C

DET

50

20

19

RET

3

3

3

Original Weight Value

10

10

7

Problem 1

Ambiguous Classification

Problem 2



Crisp Boundary

Fuzzy Weight Value

11.4

10.4

10.2

3.4. Extraction of the Estimation Equation

The aim of this section is to establish an equation that can estimate the software cost in

terms of work effort and then be used in the neural network training as an activation

function. Although similar estimation equations are proposed in [27] and [28], we decided

to create a new equation based on the ISBSG Data Repository - release 8.

3.4.1. Data Preparation

In order to obtain a reasonable equation, the raw data must be filtered by several criteria,

since it is necessary to ensure that the model is built on the basis of a reliable data set.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

According to the information provided by the ISBSG [29], only the data points whose

quality ratings are A or B should be considered. Hence, we discarded the C and D rating

projects and were left with the remaining 1,445 projects.

Next, we wanted to ensure that further analysis is based on the most widely used

counting methods. Although FP has several variations of counting methods, including

IFPUG [13], COSMIC [14] and Mark II [15], the IFPUG method is the most popular

standard of counting as it is used by 90% of the projects (1,827 out of 2,027) in the whole

ISBSG data set. Hence, only the projects counted using the IFPUG method were selected.

The work efforts of the projects are recorded at different resource levels, including level

one (development team), level two (development support team), level three (computer

operations) and level four (end user or client). To ensure the reliability of further analysis,

we ensured that our data was based on the same resource level as the majority of projects.

Thus, we chose to have the projects recorded at the first resource level, a level which

covers 70% (1,433 out of 2,027) of the projects in the whole ISBSG data set.

Development type is the final criterion on which we based our analysis. There are three

major development types of the projects in the ISBSG data set: new development (838

projects), enhancement (1,132 projects), and redevelopment (55 projects). However, there

is one utility development project and one purchase package project that do not belong to

any one of the three major development types. The new development and redevelopment

projects can be classified into one large group, whose results are calculated using the

original FP equation (Equation 3) of the first section. However, the enhancement projects

are calculated using a very different equation [13] (see Equation 4); these projects should

be treated as a separate case study.

VAFbefore

UFPdelete

VAFafter

UFPchange

UFPadd

FPenhance

×

+

×

+

=

)

(

Equation 4

The new development and redevelopment projects that were based on the original FP

equation were considered. In order for the weight values to be further calibrated using the

neural network, the neuro-fuzzy FP model considers the projects that offer the 15

categories of unadjusted FP, in other words, the five function components with low,

average and high classifications. Furthermore, in order to add flexibility to the model, we



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

chose those projects that provided the 14 GSC rating values; almost all of the projects that

provide the 15 UFP categories provide 14 GSC rating values as well.

The application of all of these criteria results in a significant decrease in the number of

projects. As a result, a subset of 409 projects was obtained where the quality rating is A or

B, the counting method is IFPUG, the effort resource level is one, and the development

type is new or redevelopment. A further reduction of the projects to those that provide the

15 unadjusted FP categories and 14 GSC rating values resulted in a 184 project data set that

was used to build the equation. Similarly, Angelis, Stamelos and Morisio [30] conducted

research on the ISBSG data repository and encountered the same problem; they used

ISBSG - release 6, which contains 789 projects, but had only 63 projects left after applying

the filtering criteria.

3.4.2. Statistical Analysis

After applying the filtering criteria, the data obtained was transformed to satisfy the

assumptions for regression analysis; the positive relationship between the work effort and

size has been reported in [27], [28], and [31]. FP is a functional software size that is

calculated by multiplying the UFP and the VAF, as shown in Equation 3. However, the

definition of VAF, which is supposed to reflect the technical complexity, has been

criticized for overlapping and for being outdated [30], [32]. The unadjusted FP has been

standardized as an unadjusted functional size measurement through the International

Organization for Standardization (ISO) [33], but the VAF has not. The ISBSG - release 8


## data field description document recommends using the field of “Normalized Work Effort”


as a project work effort. Thus, we have chosen UFP as the software size, and the

normalized work effort as the effort in statistical analysis.

The statistical regression analysis assumes that the underlying data are normally

distributed; however, our original data is highly skewed. To approximate a normal

distribution, we apply a logarithmic transformation to these variables in order to decrease

the large values and to bring the data closer together. After the transformation, ln UFP and

ln Work Effort are approximately normally distributed. The relationship between the work

effort and the size is illustrated, using two-dimensional graphs as shown in Figures 4(a) and

4(b), before and after the logarithmic transformation respectively. Furthermore, there is an



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

obviously positive linear relationship between effort and size after the logarithmic

transformation.

(a) Work Effort and UFP                                                           (b) ln Work Effort and ln UFP

Figure 4 - Graphs of UFP and Work Effort

The regression process applied to the data set is automated by the statistical software

package SPSS version 12. An equation in the form of Equation 5 was calculated, and its

equivalent form is shown in Equation 6:

ln Effort = α ∙ln UFP + β                                                                 Equation 5

Effort = A· UFP B                                                              Equation 6

where α, β, A, B are all coefficients calculated from the regression process.

Certain post regression analysis was done to check the validity of the regression. It is

observed that the residuals are normally distributed, independent, with a constant variance

and having a mean value that equals zero. Therefore, the assumptions for statistical

regression analysis are satisfied and we can conclude that Equation 5 and its equivalent

form Equation 6 are valid.

3.4.3 Remarks on Equation Extraction

Though of simple form, Equation 6 is derived from the filtered data set and analyzed by

a reliable statistical procedure that includes logarithmic transformation, statistical



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

regression, and post regression analysis. It contains UFP as the only predictor and excludes

VAF, a parameter receiving much criticism. 1 The equation is flexible to the extent that it

does not include any special ISBSG parameters, and thus, it can estimate FP-oriented

projects and can be extended to include cost drivers for future works.

3.5. Neural Network Learning Model

The neural network technique is used in the processing layer of the neuro-fuzzy FP model

to learn the weight values of unadjusted FP and to calibrate FP so that it reflects the trend of

current software. The weight values obtained from learning via the neural network are then

utilized in the adjusted fuzzy complexity weight system.

3.5.1. Network Structure

The neural network used in the neuro-fuzzy FP model is a typical multi-layer feed-forward

network whose structure is depicted in Figure 5. The network consists of three layers: input,

middle, and output.

The input layer is composed of 16 neurons, denoted as Xi, with i ranging in value from 1

to 16. Among this group of 16, neurons X1 to X15 represent the three complexity ratings of

five unadjusted FP function components. The inputs of these 15 neurons are the numbers of

their respective function components. They are denoted by codes such as NINLOW

(number of low External Inputs), NFLAVG (number of average Internal Logical Files),

and NQUHGH (number of high External Inquiries), and are described in detail in Table

VII. These 15 neurons are all connected to neuron Y in the middle layer and are associated

with the weights of wi, with i ranging in value from 1 to 15. Neuron X16  is a bias node with

a constant input of one and is connected to neuron Z in the output layer with an associated

weight of v2, which represents the coefficient A in Equation 6.

1 A test was done to select VAF as the predictor and included it in the equation, but the stepwise regression

process automated by SPSS discarded VAF from the equation due to its poor performance.



Figure 5 - Neural Network Structure of Neuro-Fuzzy FP Model

Table VII - NOTATION OF NEURON Xi  INPUTS

Low

Average

High

External Inputs

NINLOW X1

NINAVG X2

NINHGH X3

External Outputs

NOULOW X4

NOUAVG X5

NOUHGH X6

External Inquiries

NQULOW X7

NQUAVG X8

NQUHGH X9

Internal Logical Files

NFLLOW X10

NFLAVG X11

NFLHGH X12

External Interface Files

NIXLOW X13

NIXAVG X14

NIXHGH X15

In the middle layer, neuron Y receives the outputs from the 15 neurons in the input layer

and is then connected to neuron Z in the output layer. The output of neuron Y can be

15

expressed as:

∑

=

⋅

=

1

i

Wi

Xi

Y

which is functionally equivalent to the UFP calculation

3

5

formula (

∑∑

=

=

⋅

=

1

i

j

Wij

Zij

UFP

).

1

The output layer has only one neuron, Z, that receives the outputs from neuron Y of the

middle layer and neuron X16  of the input layer. The activation function of neuron Z is

Z = v2 ∙Yv1 which is of the same form as Equation 6 (Effort = A· UFPB) extracted by

regression analysis. Thus, neuron Z can be used to estimate the software cost in work effort

from software size in UFP.

The underlying reason for choosing work effort as the output to train the UFP weight

values is because these weight values are supposed to reflect the software component



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

complexity. This complexity should be proportional to the project work effort, which is

based on the common sense notion that the more complex the software, the more effort

should be put in. Overall, the equation obtained by statistical analysis has a sound

mathematical ground and a solid explanation. It is used as the activation function in the

neural network, and thus, the infamous problem of the traditional neural network behaving

like a black-box is avoided.

Based on the neural network structure, a back-propagation learning algorithm is

conducted in order to obtain the calibrated weight values of UFP. The purpose of this

algorithm is to minimize the prediction difference between the estimated and actual efforts.

Given NN projects, the prediction difference can be expressed as the error signal defined in

Equation 7:

2

1 2

1









−

= ∑

=

Zdn

Zdn

Zn

E

NN

Equation 7

n

where E is the error signal, Zn is the estimated effort of the nth project and Zdn is the actual

effort of the nth project, the desired output. The learning procedure is subject to monotonic

constraints; in other words, the UFP weight values must be Low < Average < High.

3.5.2. Remarks on Neural Network Learning

The neural network part of the model is designed to calibrate UFP weight values and to

solve the three problems with the FP complexity weight system mentioned in Section 2,

which include Problem 3 (weight values obsolete), Problem 4 (weight values defined

subjectively), and Problem 5 (weight values defined locally). The new calibrated weight

values overcome Problems 4 and 5, because they are acquired from the ISBSG Data

Repository - release 8, which is compiled from dozens of countries and covers a broad

range of software industry. Furthermore, Problem 3 is also addressed because 75% of the

projects are fewer than five years old.

3.6 Post-Tuned Fuzzy Weight Measurement System

The calibrated weight values obtained from the neural network learning are imported in

the adjusted fuzzy weight measurement system and are specifically applied to the output



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

membership functions. An example of the adjusted output membership functions of

External Inputs is given in Figure 6. The adjusted weight measurement system can be used

to count FP for new projects more accurately. Also, the pre-defined and adjusted fuzzy

measurements constitute the complete fuzzy measurement system of the neuro-fuzzy FP

model.

Figure 6 - Post-tuned Fuzzy Sets for External Inputs


## 4. MODEL ASSESSMENT


Five experiments were conducted to validate the model. For each experiment, the

original data set (184 projects) was randomly separated into 100 training data points and 84

test data points. The outliers are the abnormal project data points with large noise that may

distort the training result. Thus, we used the training data set excluding the outliers to

calibrate UFP weight values, but used the rest of the data points to test the model.

The calibrated UFP weight values obtained from five experiments are listed in Table

VIII, and the original weight values as comparison. The observation of lower weight values

after calibration means that fewer work efforts are needed to accomplish the same complex

software component. This is in accordance with the fact that overall productivity of the

software industry has been continuously increasing since Function Points was invented in

1979.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Table - VIII Calibrated UFP Weight Values

Component

Low

Average

High

Original

Calibrated

Original

Calibrated

Original

Calibrated

External Inquiries

3

1.8

4

2.9

6

5.4

External Outputs

4

3.3

5

3.3

7

6.2

External Inquiries

3

1.8

4

2.9

6

5.4

Internal Logical Files

7

5.4

10

9.8

15

14.9

External Interface Files

5

4.6

7

6.9

10

10

The validation results of the five experiments are assessed by Mean Magnitude Relative

Error (MMRE) for estimation accuracy. MMRE is defined as: for n projects,

1

/|

|

1

. The results are listed in Table IX where

n

(

)

∑

=

−

=

i

i

i

i

Actual

Actual

Estimated

n

MMRE

“Improvement %.” is the MMRE improvement in percentage for each experiment. Based

on the MMRE assessment results, an average of 22% cost estimation improvement has

been achieved with the Neuro-Fuzzy Function Points Calibration model. The MMRE after

calibration is around 100%, which is still relatively large and is due to the absence of well--

defined cost drivers like COCOMO factors. Unfortunately ISBSG Release 8 does not have


## data on cost drivers.


Table IX - MMRE Validation Result

Exp.1

Exp.2

Exp.3

Exp.4

Exp.5

MMRE Original

1.38

1.58

1.57

1.39

1.42

MMRE Calibrated

1.10

1.28

1.17

1.03

1.11

Improvement %

20%

19%

25%

26%

22%

Average Improvement %



22%

The validation results of the five experiments are also assessed by Prediction at level p

(PRED) criteria, i.e.

N

k

p

PRED

/

)

(

=

, where N is the total number of projects, k is the

number of projects with absolute relative error of p. Four PRED criteria are assessed in this

work, namely Pred 25, Pred 50, Pred 75 and Pred 100. Table X lists the PRED assessment


## result.




International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Table X - PRED Validation Results

Average

Original

Average

Improvement

Pred 25

13%

12%

0%

Average

Calibrated

Pred 50

23%

27%

4%

Pred 75

40%

46%

6%

Pred 100      60%

67%

8%

Figure 7 plots the comparison of the original and the calibrated PRED results where the

overall improvement is observed: the line with square signs (calibrated) is above the line

with diamond signs (original).

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Pred 25

Pred 50

Pred 75

Pred 100

Original

Calibrated



Figure 7 - PRED Validation Results Comparison

4.1 Weakness of the Model

Threats to validity are conditions that limit the researcher’s ability to generalize the


## results of the experiment to industrial practice, which was the case with this study. Specific


measures were taken to support validity; for example, a random sampling technique was

used to draw samples from the population in order to conduct experiments, and filtering

was applied to the ISBSG data set. Five experiments were conducted by drawing five

different random samples in order to generalize the results. “Post hoc” analysis of effect

size and power reinforced the validity of the experiments by yielding a large effect size.

The proposed calibration of the FP element’s weights were applied to the ISBSG data set



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

to monitor the effectiveness of the approach; a potential threat to the validity of this study

involved the question of whether or not similar results would be obtained with an entirely

different sample. In this investigation, we calibrated the weights of the five FP elements

using only the ISBSG data set, which has raised a threat to the validity of the calibration

process. The ISBSG data set contains projects using different function point counting

techniques, such as IFPUG, COSMIC and MARK II. Because 90% of the sample used the

IFPUG counting method, we therefore restricted our experiments to IFPUG projects. This

decision may lead to the question as to whether the proposed model’s outcome will be valid

if the model is used with the other two types of FP counting technique besides IFPUG.

ISBSG - release 8 is a large and wide-range project data repository, so the calibrated FP

weight values learned from this repository reflect the maturity level of the software

industry at that time. However, software development is a rapidly growing industry and

these calibrated weight values will not reflect tomorrow’s software. In the future, when

modern project data is available, the FP weight values will again need to be re-calibrated to

reflect the latest software industry trend.

Our study is a data-driven type of research where we extracted a model based on known

facts. The proposed model is more meaningful for small projects, which are actually the

most common type of projects in the software industry. This limitation is due to the ISBSG


## data set characteristics used in this study, and it may raise concerns about the validity,


specifically with large projects. In reality, there are more small projects than large ones,

and even the large projects tend to be subdivided into smaller projects, so that they become

easier to manage. Although the proposed approach has some potential to threaten the

model's validity, we followed appropriate research procedures by conducting and reporting

tests to guarantee the reliability of the study, and certain measures were also taken to

ensure its validity.


## 5. CONCLUSIONS


FP as a software size metric is an important topic in the software engineering domain.

The validation results of the neuro-fuzzy FP model with the empirical data repository

(ISBSG - release 8) show a 22% improvement in software cost estimation. This result



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

indicates that the original unadjusted FP weight values require updated calibration for more

accurate cost estimations. This paper provides a framework to calibrate the complexity

weight values and solves the problems with the FP weight mentioned in Section 2.

The fuzzy part of the neuro-fuzzy FP model produces an exact complexity degree for

each functional component by processing its associated file numbers using fuzzy logic.

This part of the model overcomes two problems with the unadjusted FP complexity

classification: ambiguous classification (Problem 1) and crisp boundary (Problem 2), as

described in sub-section 3.3.

The neural network part of the neuro-fuzzy FP model calibrates UFP weight values

using the ISBSG Data Repository - release 8, which contains 2,027 projects from dozens of

countries and covers a broad range of project types from many industries, with 75% of the

projects being less than five years old. This part of the model overcomes three problems

with the unadjusted FP complexity weight values: obsolete weight values (Problem 3),

weight values defined subjectively (Problem 4), and weight values defined locally

(Problem 5) as laid out in sub-sections 3.5 and 3.6.

Finally, sub-section 3.4 presents a new equation to estimate the software cost in work

effort initially derived from the ISBSG Data Repository - release 8. It is further improved

with the reliable filtered data set and analyzed by a reliable statistical procedure. This

equation fulfills the requirement of being flexible and integral, and has the potential to

involve other cost drivers in future research.


## REFERENCES


[1]    B. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics, Prentice Hall, 1981.

[2]

B. Boehm, E. Horowitz, R. Madachy, D. Reifer, B. Clark, B. Steece, A. Brown, S.

Chulani, and C. Abts, Software Cost Estimation with COCOMO II, Prentice Hall,

2000.

[3]

L. H. Putnam and W. Myers, Measures of Excellence, Prentice Hall, 1992.

[4]

A. Albrecht, “Measuring Application Development Productivity,” Proceedings of

the Joint SHARE/GUIDE/IBM Application Development Symposium, October

1979, pp. 83–92.

[5]

S. Shapiro, “Splitting the Difference: The Historical Necessity of Synthesis in



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Software Engineering”, IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 19, no. 1, pp.

20-54, 1977.

[6]

A. Idri, T. M. Khosgoftaar and A. Abran “Can Neural Networks Be Easily

Interpreted in Software Cost Estimation?”, IEEE International Conference on

Fuzzy Systems, pp. 1162-1167, 2002.

[7]

K. Srinivasan and D. Fisher, “Machine Learning Approaches to Estimating

Software Development Effort”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol.

21, no. 2, pp. 126-137, 1995.

[8]

S. G. MacDonell, “Software Source Code Sizing Using Fuzzy Logic Modeling”,

Information and Software Technology, vol. 45, pp. 389-404, 2003.

[9]

M. A. Ahmed, M. O. Saliu and J. AlGhamdi, “Adaptive Fuzzy-Logic Based

Framework for Software Development Effort Prediction”, Information and

Software Technology, vol. 47, pp. 31-48, 2005.

[10]

Z. Xu and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Identification of Fuzzy Models of Software Cost

Estimation”, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 145, pp. 141-163, 2004.

[11]

X. Huang, D. Ho, J. Ren and L. F. Capretz, “A Soft Computing Framework for

Software Effort Estimation”, Soft Computing Journal, Springer, vol. 10, no. 2, pp.

170-177, 2006.

[12]

X. Huang, D. Ho, J. Ren and L. F. Capretz “Improving the COCOMO Model with a

Neuro-Fuzzy Approach”, Applied Soft Computing Journal, Elsevier Science, vol. 7,

pp. 29-40, 2007.

[13]

IFPUG, Function Point Counting Practices Manual, International Function Point

Users Group, January 2004.

[14]

COSMIC, COSMIC Full Function Point Measurement Manual, Common Software

Measurement International Consortium, January 2003.

[15]

C. Symons, “Function Point Analysis: Difficulties and Improvements,” IEEE

Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 2–11, January 1988.

[16]

G. R. Finnie, G. E. Wittig and J-M. Desharnais, “A Comparison of Software Effort

Estimation Techniques: Using Function Points with Neural Networks, Case-Based

Reasoning and Regression Models”, Journal of Systems Software, vol. 39, pp.

281-289, 1977.



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

[17]

C. Yau and H-L. Tsoi, “Modelling the Probabilistic Behaviour of Function Point


## Analysis”, Information and Software Technology, vol. 40, pp. 59-68, 1998.


[18]

O. S. Lima, P. F. M. Farias and A. D. Belchior, “Fuzzy Modeling for Function

Points Analysis”, Software Quality Journal, vol. 11, pp. 149-166, 2003.

[19]

M. A. Al-Hajri, A. A. A. Ghani, M. S. Sulaiman and M. H. Selamat, “Modification

of Standard Function Point Complexity Weights System”, Journal of Systems and

Software, vol. 74, pp. 195-206, 2005.

[20]

S. Haykin, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, Prentice Hall, 1998.

[21]

L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Logic,” Computer, vol. 21, pp. 83–93, April 1988.

[22]

T. J. Ross, Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons,

2004.

[23]

L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Sets,” Information and Control, vol. 8, pp. 338–353, March

1965.

[24]

J. S. R. Jang, C. T. Sun, and E. Mizutani, Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft Computing: A

Computational Approach to Learning and Machine Intelligence, Prentice Hall,

1997.

[25]

ISBSG, Data Repository – release 8, International Software Benchmarking

Standards Group, 2004.

[26]

E. H. Mamdani, “Application of Fuzzy Logic to Approximate Reasoning Using

Linguistic Synthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 26, no. 12, pp.

1182–1191, 1977.

[27]

A. J. Albrecht and J. E. Gaffney, “Software Function, Source Lines of Code and

Development Effort Prediction: A Software Science Validation,” IEEE

Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 639–648, June 1983.

[28]

J. E. Matson, B. E. Barrett, and J. M. Mellichamp, “Software Development Cost

Estimation Using Function Points,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,

vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 275–287, April 1994.

[29]

ISBSG, Guidance on the Use of the ISBSG Data, International Software

Benchmarking Standards Group, 2004.

[30]

L. Angelis, I. Stamelos, and M. Morisio, “Building a Software Cost Estimation

Model Based on Categorical Data,” Proceedings of the 7th International



International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1-14, January 2019, IOS Press

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/HIS-2009-0061

Symposium on Software Metrics, IEEE Computer Society, 2001.

[31]

C. F. Kemerer, “An Empirical Validation of Software Cost Estimation Models,”

Communications of the ACM, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 416-429, May 1987.

[32]

C. Symons, “Come Back Function Point Analysis (Modernised) All Is Forgiven!,”

<http://www.gifpa.co.uk/library/Papers/Symons/fesmafpa2001/paper.html>,

2001.

[33]

ISO, IFPUG 4.1 Unadjusted Functional Size Measurement Method – Counting

Practices Manual, International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 20926,

2003.