Longitudinal Citation Prediction using Temporal Graph Neural Networks

Andreas Nugaard Holm1∗and Barbara Plank2 and Dustin Wright1 and Isabelle Augenstein1

1Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen

2Department of Computer Science, IT University of Copenhagen

{aholm, dw, augenstein}@di.ku.dk, bapl@itu.dk


## Abstract


Citation count prediction is the task of predict-

ing the number of citations a paper has gained

after a period of time. Prior work viewed this

as a static prediction task. As papers and their

citations evolve over time, considering the dy-

namics of the number of citations a paper will

receive would seem logical. Here, we intro-

duce the task of sequence citation prediction.

The goal is to accurately predict the trajectory

of the number of citations a scholarly work re-

ceives over time. We propose to view papers

as a structured network of citations, allowing

us to use topological information as a learn-

ing signal. Additionally, we learn how this dy-

namic citation network changes over time and

the impact of paper meta-data such as authors,

venues and abstracts.

To approach the new

task, we derive a dynamic citation network

from Semantic Scholar spanning over 42 years.

We present a model which exploits topological

and temporal information using graph convolu-

tion networks paired with sequence prediction,

and compare it against multiple baselines, test-

ing the importance of topological and temporal

information and analyzing model performance.

Our experiments show that leveraging both the

temporal and topological information greatly

increases the performance of predicting cita-

tion counts over time.

arXiv:2012.05742v2  [cs.CL]  15 Apr 2021

Figure 1: Illustration of the development of the dy-

namic graph through three time steps. Each node repre-

sents a paper; edges are citations between papers. Red

nodes represent new papers in the current time step.

a dataset to contain the papers’ citation counts over

a period of time, which adds a temporal element to

the data, which can then be encoded by sequential

machine learning models, such as Long short-term

memory models (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmid-

huber, 1997). Additionally, scholarly documents

exhibit a natural graph-like structure in their ci-

tation networks. Given recent developments in

modeling such data (Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al.,


## 2021) and prior research showing that modeling


input as graphs can be beneﬁcial, we hypothesize

that modeling a paper’s citation network is useful

for predicting citation counts over time.

In this paper, we consider citation networks, a

dynamic graph which evolves over time as new ci-

tations and papers are added to the network. Lever-

aging the structured data in the graph allows us

to discover complex relationships between papers.

We want to tap into that knowledge and treat the

citation data as a network, such that we can further

exploit topological information and not just tem-

poral information. By doing so, we investigate the

hypothesis of paper citation counts being correlated

with features such as authors, venue, and topics.

We use the well-established Semantic Scholar


## dataset (Ammar et al., 2018) to construct our cita-


tion network. Its meta-data allows us to construct a

dynamic citation network which covers a 42 year

time-line, with an updated graph for each year. The

Semantic Scholar dataset’s meta-data also contains

information about each paper’s authors, venue, and

1


## Introduction


The problem of predicting citation counts of pa-

pers has been a long-standing research problem.

Predicting citation counts allows us to better un-

derstand the relationship between a paper and its

impact. However, prior research has viewed this as

a static prediction problem, i.e. only predicting a

single citation count at a static point in time. This

ignores the natural development of the data as new

papers are being published. Here, we propose to

view the problem as a sequence prediction task,

with models then having the ability to capture the

evolving nature of citations. This, in turn, requires



as peer-reviews (Plank and Dalen, 2019; Li et al.,


## 2019) to predict a paper’s citation count.


What is common in existing research is the tar-

get task: predicting a single citation count. This

citation count can be set as one of the following

years, or the citation count n years in the future.

To predict these citation counts, we see a variety

of different neural network models with distinct

architectures (Li et al., 2019; Wen et al., 2020), as

well as papers which focus on deeper feature vector


## analysis, where regression models are used (Davle-


tov et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2014). A side effect from

prior research’s focus on predicting single citation

counts is that the utilized citation networks are

static graphs, based on paper databases such as Ar-

netMiner (Tang et al., 2007), Arxiv HEP-TH (Man-

junatha et al., 2003) and CiteSeerX (Caragea et al.,

2014). These static citation networks are not suit-

able for our proposed task because they only con-

tain the topological information at a single point in

time.

Citation networks are not exclusively used for

citation count prediction. Other citation networks

such as Cora (Sen et al., 2008), CiteSeer (Giles

et al., 1998) or PubMed (Sen et al., 2008), all well

known benchmark graphs, are used for node classi-

ﬁcation tasks, where the task is to predict a paper’s

topic. These networks are provided with minimal

content. They consist of an adjacency matrix, the

connections between citations, and a simple feature

vector for each node of either 0/1-valued vector

or a tf-idf vector, based on the dictionary of the

paper content. These existing datasets do not ﬁt

our purpose, hence we derive our own, described

in Sec. 4.2.

topics, allowing us to study the correlation between

these features and the citation count of a paper

when considering the evolving nature of the cita-

tion network. The correlation between these fea-

tures and citation counts is well-known and studied

by prior work (Yan et al., 2011). Prior studies show

that citations are correlated and there is a strong cor-

relation between features such as authors, but are

limited by only predicting a single citation, and not

predicting the natural evolution of a papers growth.

We propose to use the constructed dynamic ci-

tation network (see Section 4.2) to predict the tra-

jectory of the number of citations papers will re-

ceive over time, a new sequence prediction task

introduced in this work. Furthermore, we propose

an encoder-decoder model to solve the proposed

task, which uses graph convolutional layers (Kipf

and Welling, 2017) to exploit the graphs’ topolog-

ical features and an LSTM to model the temporal

component of the graphs. We compare our model

against a vanilla graph convolutional neural net-

work (GCN) and a vanilla LSTM, which individu-

ally incorporate either the topological information

or the temporal information, but not both.

Our contributions are as follows: 1) A dynamic

citation network based on the Semantic Scholar


## dataset. The dynamic citation network contains 42


time-steps, with an updated graph at each time-step,

based on yearly information. 2) We introduce the

task of sequence citation count prediction. 3) A

novel encoder-decoder model based on a GCN and

LSTM to extract the dynamic graph’s topological

and temporal components. 4) A thorough study of

the correlation between citation counts and tempo-

ral components.

2


## Related Work


3

Temporal Graph Neural Network

2.1

Citation Count Prediction

Our model is an encoder-decoder model and there-

fore consists of two major components. The ﬁrst

component is the encoder, which takes an adja-

cency matrix of node connections and a node fea-

ture matrix as input, where the node feature matrix

can e.g. consist of author information (illustrated

in Figure 2). It uses the topological information

from the graphs and creates feature vectors contain-

ing both the topological node features via a GCN.

It should be noted that due to the use of dynamic

graphs, the encoder generates a sequence of graph

embeddings, one for each graph in the sequence.

The second component, the decoder, utilizes the

sequence of graph embeddings created by the en-

The task of predicting a paper’s citations aims to

predict the number of citations which a paper has

obtained either by a given year or after n years.

The task itself is not new and has been researched

throughout the years, and multiple different ap-

proaches have been tried and shown to be effective.

Some of these studies, have focused on feature

vectors (Yan et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2014) and ex-

plored distinct feature vectors’ performance, where

they primarily rely on meta-data, e.g. venue and

authors. As peer review data has become avail-

able (Kang et al., 2018), recent research has fo-

cused on using non-meta-data information, such



We can then simplify the above equation:

coder. By using an LSTM, we extract the temporal

elements and create a sequence of citation count

predictions (CCP) for each node in the dynamic

graph.

H(l+1) = σ



ˆAtH(l)

t W (l)

(2)

where ˆA is deﬁned as ˆA = ˜D−1

2 ˜A ˜D−1

2 and t is

the time step in the dynamic graph. It should be

noted that t has been left out in the ﬁrst equation

for simplicity. We also observe here that by adding

multiple GCN layers, we allow the the graph em-

beddings to be affected by extended neighbours.

Since we work on a dynamic citation network,

we have T distinct adjacency matrices, and we have

to create a graph embedding for each graph in the

sequence:

3.1

Problem Deﬁnition

While the task of CCP has been researched before,

in this paper, we are interested in predicting a se-

quence of citation counts, which to our knowledge

is so far unexplored.

Let us start by introducing our graph nota-

tion.

We denote our dynamic graph as G =

{G0 . . . GT−1}, where Gt is a graph, at the given

time t. Each graph in the dynamic graph set is

deﬁned as Gt = (Vt, Et), where Vt is the set of

vertices at time t and Et is the set of edges at time

t. With a given dynamic graph, we aim to predict

the sequence of citations for given paper. We for-

malize this as yv = {yv

1 . . . yv

T }, where yv

t is the

number of citations for vt ∈Vt and yv

t = |Ev

t |.

For our proposed task, we are given the dynamic

graph G, and are to predict the sequence of citation

counts y.

Z = {Z0 . . . ZT } = {f(X, At) | At ∈A},

(3)

where the function f is the GCN network, Zt ∈

Rm×n is a single graph embedding of dimension-

ality n with m nodes, and Z is the set of graph

embeddings created by the GCN. It should be

noted that X is shown as being independent of

time, which is true for some of our node embed-

dings. However, some of our node embeddings

are based on citations, which change through time,

which makes X dependent on time. We will ex-

plore the distinct node embeddings in a later sec-

tion. As shown in the equation, we also keep the

same model over time, and do not change the GCN

even though the graph changes. We instead try to

generalize the model, working on all the graphs in

the dynamic graph.

3.2

Topological Feature Extraction

One of the central hypotheses we want to examine

is if complex structural dependencies in a citation

network can help predict the citation count of a pa-

per. To test this, we employ a GCN to extract topo-

logical dependencies from the graphs. We choose a

GCN over other methods as they work in Euclidean

space, and are thus easy to use with other neural ar-

chitectures such as convolutional neural networks

(CNN) (Wu et al., 2021).

The GCN uses the data ﬂow between edges in

the graph to create a graph embedding. As such,

we can create an embedding inﬂuenced by all of

the neighboring nodes in the graph. In this, we

hypothesize that there is a relationship between the

number of citations a given paper receives and that

of its neighbors. The connections between the pa-

pers is described by an adjacency matrix A. Using

our notation, we describe the GCN as follows:

3.2.1

Temporal Feature Extraction

With the constructed graph embeddings, containing

both topological information and node information.

We want to extract the temporal information, which

we use the sequence of graph embeddings to do.

To extract the temporal information, we utilize an

LSTM, where we can formalize the input and out-

put as Y = l(Z), where the function l is the LSTM

and Y ∈Rm∗T are the CCPs.

3.2.2

Encoder-Decoder

In the ﬁnal model, we combine the GCN and LSTM

in an encoder-decoder model. The primary chal-

lenge in combining these two models though is that

they operate on vastly different inputs. The GCN

operates on entire graphs and needs all the nodes

to appear in the graphs, including nodes which it

intends to predict. The LSTM, however, does not

have this requirement and can work on batches. To

solve this issue in a simple yet effective approach,

H(l+1) = σ



˜D−1

2 H(l)W (l)

,

(1)

2 ˜A ˜D−1

where ˜A = A + I; I is the identity matrix (which

enables self-loops in ˜A); ˜Dii = P

j ˜Aij, l is the

l’th layer in the model; σ is an activation function;

and H(l+1) is the output of the GCN layer H(l).



2018)1. The dataset is a collection of close to

200, 000, 000 scientiﬁc papers; the size of a graph

of this size requires an immense system to run

experiments. To reduce the dataset to a manage-

able size, we only kept papers from the following

venues related to AI, Machine Learning and Natu-

ral Language Processing: ACL, COLING, NAACL,

EMNLP, AAAI, NeurIPS and CoNLL. With the


## dataset only containing papers from the listed


venues, we reduced the dataset’s size to 47, 091

papers. Furthermore, the Semantic Scholar dataset

also holds an extensive collection of meta-data for

each paper. We use this meta-data to construct

our dynamic graph, as well as the graph’s node

embeddings.

4.2

Graph Construction

With the dataset reduced to a more manageable size,

we search for an ideal dynamic graph of the citation

network. We deﬁne an ideal dynamic graph as the

sequence of graphs which has the largest connected

graph in the ﬁnal graph and has the most signiﬁcant

increase of nodes over time. We do not use the

largest connected graph at each time step, as it can

trick us into selecting a sub-optimal dynamic graph.

A sub-optimal dynamic graph may present itself

as the largest connected graph at a point in time,

but will not stay as the largest connected graph

through time, and will contain less nodes through

time, compared to the ideal dynamic graph. To

solve the issue of being tricked into selecting a less

ideal dynamic graph, we have to probe each node in

the data to observe the graphs’ evolution. We deﬁne

probing as the process of observing the evolution

of the graph connected to the probed node. This

process is automatically performed on all nodes of

the largest connected graph in the ﬁnal step. By

probing all the nodes, we can choose the sequence

of graphs which contains the most nodes over time.

In Algorithm 1, we describe the process in the form

of pseudo-code for a more precise insight in the

process of constructing the ideal dynamic graph.

In Table 1, we show some of the properties of

the last 10 graphs in the dynamic graph. It is clear

how the graph is evolving over time, as can be seen

in how both the number of vertices and edges in-

creases, and how the degree D increases, indicating

that the nodes in the graph obtains more citations

over time. This indicates that the dynamic graph

reﬂects the natural growth of a paper’s citations.

Figure 2: Our proposed encoder-decoder model

we embed the entire graph prior to the LSTM steps

so that in the LSTM step, we can still split the data

into batches for training, validation and testing.

While other approaches have been researched, like

embedding the GCN into the LSTM (Zhao et al.,

2019), we found the simple approach to perform

better.

Figure 2 shows the architecture of our model.

The GCN uses two layers to create the graph em-

bedding. The LSTM is a single one-directional

layer whose outputs are reduced to a sequence of

scalars through a linear layer.

4

Dynamic Citation Count Prediction

As discussed earlier, we differentiate ourselves

from prior work by predicting a sequence of ci-

tation counts over time as opposed to a single ﬁnal

citation count. Datasets for the latter exist, but

are based on paper databases. However, existing

citation networks are not usable for our task due

to the graph of the citation network being static

in those works, i.e., the citation network does not

evolve over time. Given this, we construct a dataset,

where we reconstruct the citation networks, at each

time-step, for the purpose of studying citation count

prediction over time.

4.1


## Dataset


The dataset which we used to create our dynamic

graph is based on Semantic Scholar (Ammar et al.,

1https://api.semanticscholar.org/



these features affect the performance of the model.

The choice of using authors and venues as fea-

tures for our model is based on the hypothesis that

authors listed on a paper have a major impact on

the number of citations gained. We assume the

same goes for venues: if a paper is published at a

more highly ranked venue, it is more likely to gain

a large amount of citations compared to a paper

published at a lower ranking venue. We further

motivate the choice of these two features based

on prior work (Yan et al., 2011), who shows that

author rank and venue rank are indeed two of the

three features that are most predictive. We moti-

vate the choice of using the abstract based on the

assumption that the abstract of a paper contains

information on the topics discussed in the paper,

which can be used to identify if paper’s topic is cur-

rently popular (Gerrish and Blei, 2010). We further

motivate the choice of using author and venue rank,

as prior work shows them to be the most descriptive

features (Yan et al., 2011). The following sections

provide short descriptions of the meta-data used to

create these feature vectors and how each of them

is calculated.

Algorithm 1: Dynamic Graph Construc-

tion

Input: data

Output: G

1 connected_graphs = dict()

2 for y ∈years do

3

gs ←ﬁnd_connected_graphs(data[y])

4

connected_graphs[y] ←sort(gs)

5 end

6 for paper ∈data[min](years) do

7

key_size[paper] = 0

8

for y ∈years do

9

best = 0

10

for g ∈connected_graphs[y] do

11

if paper ∈g and |g| > best then

12

best = |g|

13

end

14

end

15

key_size[paper]+ = best

16

end

17 end

18 best_paper = argmax(key_size)

19 G = dict()

20 for y ∈years do

21

for g ∈connected_graphs[y] do

22

if best_paper ∈g then

23

G[y] = g

24

break

25

end

26

end

27 end


## Abstract: To base our model on more than meta-



## data, we use the abstract of the papers to create


a feature vector. To create an embedding of the


## abstract, we utilize BERT (Devlin et al., 2019),


speciﬁcally the pre-trained SciBERT (Beltagy et al.,


## 2019) model. SciBERT is a contextualized em-


bedding model trained using a masked language

modeling objective on a large amount of scholarly

literature. Representations from SciBERT have

been shown to be useful for learning downstream

tasks with scientiﬁc text, this is why we use them

here. To obtain a feature vector of a given abstract,

we tokenize the abstract text and pass this through

SciBERT. SciBERT prepends a special [CLS] to-

ken for performing classiﬁcation tasks, so we use

the output representation of this token as the ﬁnal

feature vector for an abstract.

By only using a subset of the nodes from the full

graph to construct the dynamic graph, we ablate

some of the full graph’s properties. One notable

property of the full graph is that the citation count

of a paper is tied to the degree of a node; by using a

subset of the full graph this property does not hold

anymore, which leads to the following deﬁnition

of the size of the set of edges yv

t = |Ev

t | chang-

ing to the following for a given node yv

t ≥|Ev

t |.

Another important point is that removing edges

from the graph removes some of the information

contained in the full graph (e.g. links to papers in

other ﬁelds). Such edges are usually connected to

more prominent papers because it is often the high

impact papers, which obtain citations from papers

outside the main ﬁeld.

Author rank: To include the author information,

we created a feature vector which ranks the au-

thors based on their number of citations sorted by

highest to lowest. Due to many authors having

the same amount of citations, we allow authors

to be of the same rank. As the ﬁnal step for the

feature calculation, we normalize the rankings by

X′ =

X−Xmin

Xmax−Xmin .

4.3

Feature Generation

The created dynamic graph nodes are not depen-

dent on a set of speciﬁc features, and we can there-

fore select and create a set of features for each node

containing our desired information. With a wide

variety of meta-data ﬁelds available, we created

a set of distinct features which we used for our

predictions. Furthermore, we studied how each of

Venue rank: Together with the author rank, we

also hypothesize that the venue has an impact on



2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

|V |

14, 584

16, 603

18, 529

20, 760

23, 327

26, 529

29, 293

33, 759

38, 080

38, 168

|E|

103, 519

127, 277

152, 869

181, 666

217, 807

267, 940

308, 186

387, 738

475, 007

476, 015

Mean D

7.1

7.67

8.25

8.75

9.34

10.1

10.52

11.49

12.47

12.47

Max D

614

761

923

1, 072

1, 220

1, 371

1, 496

1, 763

2, 084

2, 086

Max citation count

2, 584

3, 110

3, 637

4, 186

4, 740

5, 403

11, 385

20, 893

32, 278

35, 200

Avg. citation count

26.33

27.48

28.87

30.15

31.49

32.94

35.84

38.31

43.0

45.41

Table 1: Key values of the graphs.

the number of citations of a paper. Therefore, we

also created a feature ranking for the venues. The

feature is calculated identically to the author rank.

It should be mentioned that the meta-data contains

a high amount of different labels for each of the

venues which we are using. We reduce all the

different labels of the same venue down to a single

label for each venue, but keep each venue separated

by year.

the labels (Maillette de Buy Wenniger et al., 2020).

Taking the log of the citation increases the stability

of the model during training.

5.2

Experimental Setup

We perform experiments with three distinct models:


## 1) Our proposed model, consisting of a GCN and


LSTM; 2) a standard LSTM; 3) a standard GCN.

All hyper-parameters are shared across the models.

For our selected models, we used the well-

known Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) optimizer,

with a learning rate of 0.001. For the GCN we used

two layers, with each layer consisting of 256 hid-

den units. Both the GCN and the GCN with LSTM

used this setup. The LSTM was set to have a single

uni-directional layer of 128 hidden units, with the

output being reduced to 1 dimension by a linear

layer. For the models using an LSTM, we its batch

size to 256. We ran the models for 1000 epochs

and if no update to the best validation score have

been observed over 10 epochs, we terminate the

training early. As mentioned, we used SciBERT

to encode the abstracts, with an output vector of

size 768. The models have been run using random

seeds, and each of the experiments have been exe-

cuted 10 times. In the results section, we report the

mean and the standard deviation of the 10 runs.

To see if our models were learning to predict the

citation counts, we created a simple deterministic

model to compare against. The model is based on

predicting the mean citation count of the training

and validation at each time step.

5

Experiments

In this section we introduce our experiments, eval-

uate the performance of our model, and explore the

importance of exploiting topological and temporal

information.

5.1


## Data


We use the constructed dynamic graph for our ex-

periments and test each of the three distinct feature

vectors. A detailed description of the feature vec-

tors and the dynamic graph’s construction can be

found in Section 4. We split our data into a training,

validation, and test set, with the following splits:

60%, 20%, and 20%. With the splits, we achieve a

training set consisting of 22, 900, and a validation

and test set of 7, 634. The training, validation and

test sets are generated randomly, but are kept ﬁxed

throughout the experiments.

Due to the large number of time-steps in the

dynamic graph, we chose to create two different

setups for our experiments. One which uses the last

10 years and another, which uses the last 20 years

of the dynamic graph. We use the later years in

the dynamic graph as these years contain the most

papers and the graph has evolved the most.

While not mentioned in Section 4.3, we perform

some further pre-processing of the data. For the

feature vectors of author rank and venue rank, we

perform a normalization of the values. We also

perform pre-processing of the labels due to the

high ﬂuctuation of the number of citations. We

take the log(c + 1) of the citation of a paper as

5.3

Evaluation Metric

To evaluate the performance of the models, we

measure the mean absolute error, deﬁned as

N

X

MAE = 1

i=1

|y −ˆy|,

(4)

N

where Y are the citation counts and ˆY are the pre-

dicted values. We also use the MAE to optimize

the model. We chose to use MAE, instead of mean



GCN + LSTM

LSTM

GCN


## Abstract


0.8284 ± 0.0162

1.0164 ± 0.0140

1.279 ± 0.1350

Author

0.7477 ± 0.0166

1.0184 ± 0.0273

1.1089 ± 0.0357

Venue

0.9259 ± 0.1161

1.0414 ± 0.0197

1.0828 ± 0.0030

Author + Venue

0.7572 ± 0.0131

1.0186 ± 0.0240

1.1248 ± 0.0271

All

0.7940 ± 0.0138

1.0152 ± 0.0157

1.3115 ± 0.1681

Table 2: The performance of our 3 models over a 10 year period. The results are reported as the MAE of the log

citations. For the 10-year period, our deterministic approach have a MAE of 1.6378.

GCN + LSTM

LSTM

GCN


## Abstract


0.8001 ± 0.0147

1.0149 ± 0.0414

1.6690 ± 0.4404

Author

0.7462 ± 0.0911

1.0179 ± 0.0536

1.3756 ± 0.0334

Venue

0.8525 ± 0.1348

1.0156 ± 0.0388

1.3212 ± 0.0039

Author + Venue

0.7515 ± 0.0889

1.0132 ± 0.0480

1.3598 ± 0.0461

All

0.7803 ± 0.0167

1.0165 ± 0.0383

1.5177 ± 0.1892

Table 3: The performance of our 3 models over a 20 year period. The results are reported as the MAE of the log

citations. For the 20-year period, our deterministic approach have a MAE of 2.0796.

until year 10, where it levels out. All of the models

decrease drastically in error up until two time-steps;

afterward, the pure models start deteriorating.

squared error (MSE), to mitigate outlier papers

which have a high amount of citations. We addi-

tionally use MAE as the training objective for the

same reason.

5.5


## Discussion


5.4


## Results


Tables 2 and 3 show the impact of single feature

types. We hypothesize that author information is

very predictive, as shown by prior work. Inspecting

the results from the different feature ablations, we

can observe that the author features performs the

best, conﬁrming our hypothesis. Figure 3 further

conﬁrms this, showing that large parts of the gain of

the model over time stems from author information.

The feature vector created by the venues per-

forms the worst in both experiments. We hypoth-

esize that the venues’ performance could be in-

creased if a more generalized notation for venue

meta-data were available, as these are noisy (also

due to OCR errors) have many spelling variants.

To further study the feature vectors, we calcu-

late the average MAE for each distinct author and

venue, where we use the predictions made by the

GCN-LSTM, trained on the author feature vectors

over 20 years. We show the result of the venues

in Table 4. One can observe that the difference

between the top and the bottom venue is drastically

lower than the difference between the top and bot-

tom author. This further indicates that the author

features is a strongly predictive feature for citation

counts.

We also show the average degree and the number

of papers for each of the venues in Table 4. With

a higher representation of papers in the collection,

we expect a more reliable prediction. This is indeed

As previously mentioned, we ran our experiments

on dynamic graphs of 10 years and 20 years. The


## results of the 10 year experiment is shown in Ta-


ble 2, and the results of the 20 years experiment is

shown in Table 3. In both of the experiments we

see that our models outperform the simple deter-

ministic approach.

By inspecting the results, one can clearly ob-

serve that the GCN-LSTM has the best perfor-

mance among the three models. We further observe

that the GCN-LSTM improves on the performance

of the pure GCN and LSTM individually, indicat-

ing that it learns from both the temporal and the

topological information provided by the dynamic

citation network. Furthermore, the GCN increases

in error going from a 10 year interval to a 20 year

interval, where we see the other models slightly

improve. To further study this, we plot the error of

the different time steps in Figure 3, which show the

models’ performances over time. By inspecting the

plots, we observe a trend of the pure models i.e. the

GCN and LSTM models, struggle and deteriorate

over time, compared to the combined GCN-LSTM

model, which keeps improving over time until it

starts plateauing. Comparing the 10-year and 20-

year plots, one can observe that the deterioration

continues, where the 10-year plot stops. It can also

be seen, that the GCN-LSTM keeps improving up



Figure 3: The plots show the MAE at each time-step for our experiments, where left show the MAE for our 10

year experiments and right show the MAE at each time-step for our 20 year experiments, where the x-axis shows

the time and y-axis the MAE.

6


## Conclusions


Venue

MAE

Avg. degree

n

1

COLING 1973 0.04295 1

20

2

AAAI 2020

0.06397 4.67

240

3

NAACL 2019

0.0863

15.25

2160

...

185 ACL 1983

0.7714

2

20

186 ACL 1988

0.7794

19.6

100

187 EMNLP 1998

0.8917

4.5

40

In this paper, we propose the task of citation se-

quence prediction. We introduce a new dataset of

scholary documents for this task based on a dy-

namic citation graph evolving of 42 years, starting

from a single node growing to a large graph. We

further study the effect of temporal and topolog-

ical information, and propose a model to beneﬁt

from both information (CGN+LSTM). Our results

show that utilizing both the temporal and topologi-

cal information is superior to only utilizing either

the temporal or topological information. Using the

proposed model, we study the effect of different

features, to identify which information is most pre-

dictive of a paper’s citation count over time. We

ﬁnd author information to be the most predictive

and informative over time.

In future work, the impact of training a single

GCN on the dynamic graph could be explored,

since the error over time of the GCN is deterio-

rates fast.

Table 4: This table shows the top 3 and bottom 3

venues, sorted by the mean MAE, going from lowest

to highest.

the case – we observe the top venues often have

a higher number of papers in their collection. To

further analyse this, we observe the average degree

of the papers in the collection, however, we do

not notice a higher performance where the degree

is higher. This indicates that the model is better

at predicting papers with higher citation counts,

because the degree of a node is tightly bound to the

number of citations.




## References


Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.

Long Short-Term Memory.

Neural Computation,

9(8):1735–1780.

Waleed Ammar, Dirk Groeneveld, Chandra Bhagavat-

ula, Iz Beltagy, Miles Crawford, Doug Downey, Ja-

son Dunkelberger, Ahmed Elgohary, Sergey Feld-

man, Vu A. Ha, Rodney Michael Kinney, Sebas-

tian Kohlmeier, Kyle Lo, Tyler C. Murray, Hsu-

Han Ooi, Matthew E. Peters, Joanna L. Power, Sam

Skjonsberg, Lucy Lu Wang, Christopher Wilhelm,

Zheng Yuan, Madeleine van Zuylen, and Oren Et-

zioni. 2018. Construction of the Literature Graph in

Semantic Scholar. In NAACL-HLT.

Dongyeop Kang, Waleed Ammar, Bhavana Dalvi,

Madeleine van Zuylen, Sebastian Kohlmeier, Ed-

uard Hovy, and Roy Schwartz. 2018. A Dataset of

Peer Reviews (PeerRead): Collection, Insights and

NLP Applications. arXiv:1804.09635 [cs]. ArXiv:

1804.09635.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A


## Method for Stochastic Optimization. In 3rd Inter-


national Conference on Learning Representations,

ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,

Conference Track Proceedings.

Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciB-

ERT: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientiﬁc

Text.

In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing

and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-

ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages

3615–3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for

Computational Linguistics.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017.

Semi-

Supervised Classiﬁcation with Graph Convolutional

Networks.

In 5th International Conference on

Learning Representations,

ICLR 2017,

Toulon,

France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Pro-

ceedings. OpenReview.net.

Gideon Maillette de Buy Wenniger, Thomas van

Dongen, Eleri Aedmaa, Herbert Teun Kruitbosch,

Edwin A. Valentijn,

and Lambert Schomaker.

2020.

Structure-Tags Improve Text Classiﬁcation

for Scholarly Document Quality Prediction. In Pro-

ceedings of the First Workshop on Scholarly Docu-

ment Processing, pages 158–167, Online. Associa-

tion for Computational Linguistics.

Siqing Li, Wayne Xin Zhao, Eddy Jing Yin, and Ji-

Rong Wen. 2019. A Neural Citation Count Predic-

tion Model based on Peer Review Text. In Proceed-

ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods

in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-

national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-

cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4913–4923, Hong

Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.

Cornelia Caragea, Jian Wu, Alina Ciobanu, Kyle

Williams, Juan Fernández-Ramírez, Hung-Hsuan

Chen, Zhaohui Wu, and Lee Giles. 2014. CiteSeerx:

A Scholarly Big Dataset. In Advances in Informa-

tion Retrieval, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,

pages 311–322, Cham. Springer International Pub-

lishing.

J. N. Manjunatha, K. R. Sivaramakrishnan, Raghaven-

dra Kumar Pandey, and M Narasimha Murthy. 2003.

Citation prediction using time series approach KDD

Cup 2003 (task 1).

ACM SIGKDD Explorations

Newsletter, 5(2):152–153.

Feruz Davletov, Ali Selman Aydin, and Ali Cakmak.


## 2014. High Impact Academic Paper Prediction Us-


ing Temporal and Topological Features. In Proceed-

ings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on

Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-

ment - CIKM ’14, pages 491–498, Shanghai, China.

ACM Press.

Barbara Plank and Reinard van Dalen. 2019.

Cite-

Tracked: A Longitudinal Dataset of Peer Reviews

and Citations. In Proceedings of BIRNDL ACM SI-

GIR, Paris, France, July 25, 2019, volume 2414,

pages 116–122. CEUR-WS.org.

Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise

Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad. 2008.

Collective Classiﬁcation in Network Data. AI Mag-

azine, 29(3):93–93. Number: 3.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and

Kristina Toutanova. 2019.

BERT: Pre-training

of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language

Understanding.

arXiv:1810.04805 [cs].

ArXiv:

1810.04805.

Jie Tang, Duo Zhang, and Limin Yao. 2007.

Social

Network Extraction of Academic Researchers.

In

Proceedings of the 2007 Seventh IEEE International

Conference on Data Mining, ICDM ’07, pages 292–

301, USA. IEEE Computer Society.

Sean M. Gerrish and David M. Blei. 2010. A language-

based approach to measuring scholarly impact. In

Proceedings of the 27th International Conference

on International Conference on Machine Learning,

ICML’10, pages 375–382, Madison, WI, USA. Om-

nipress.

J. Wen, L. Wu, and J. Chai. 2020. Paper Citation Count

Prediction Based on Recurrent Neural Network with

Gated Recurrent Unit. In 2020 IEEE 10th Interna-

tional Conference on Electronics Information and

Emergency Communication (ICEIEC), pages 303–


## 306. ISSN: 2377-844X.


C. L. Giles, K. D. Bollacker, and S. Lawrence. 1998.

CiteSeer: an automatic citation indexing system. In

Proceedings of the ACM International Conference

on Digital Libraries, pages 89–98. ACM.



Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu.


## 2021. A Comprehensive Survey on Graph Neural


Networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks

and Learning Systems, 32(1):4–24.

Rui Yan, Jie Tang, Xiaobing Liu, Dongdong Shan, and

Xiaoming Li. 2011. Citation count prediction: learn-

ing to estimate future citations for literature. In Pro-

ceedings of the 20th ACM international conference

on Information and knowledge management - CIKM

’11, page 1247, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. ACM Press.

Tian Yu, Guang Yu, Peng-Yu Li, and Liang Wang.


## 2014. Citation impact prediction for scientiﬁc pa-


pers using stepwise regression analysis. Scientomet-

rics, 101(2):1233–1252.

Ling Zhao,

Yujiao Song,

Chao Zhang,

Yu Liu,

Pu Wang, Tao Lin, Min Deng, and Haifeng Li. 2019.

T-GCN: A Temporal Graph Convolutional Network

for Trafﬁc Prediction. IEEE Transactions on Intelli-

gent Transportation Systems, pages 1–11.

Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan

Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,

Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. 2020.

Graph

neural networks: A review of methods and applica-

tions. AI Open, 1:57–81.