Fitzgerald et al.

RESEARCH

Is academia becoming more localised? The

growth of regional knowledge networks within

international research collaboration

John Fitzgerald1*†, Sanna Ojanper¨a1,2,4 and Neave O’Clery1,3,4

arXiv:2101.09520v2  [cs.SI]  1 Jun 2021

*Correspondence:

ﬁtzgeraldj@maths.ox.ac.uk


## Abstract


1Mathematical Institute, Oxford

University, Andrew Wiles Building,

Radcliﬀe Observatory Quarter,

OX2 6GG, Oxford, UK

It is well-established that the process of learning and capability building is core

to economic development and structural transformation. Since knowledge is

‘sticky’, a key component of this process is learning-by-doing, which can be

achieved via a variety of mechanisms including international research

collaboration. Uncovering signiﬁcant inter-country research ties using Scopus

co-authorship data, we show that within-region collaboration has increased over

the past ﬁve decades relative to international collaboration. Further supporting

this insight, we ﬁnd that while communities present in the global collaboration

network before 2000 were often based on historical geopolitical or colonial lines,

in more recent years they increasingly align with a simple partition of countries by

regions. These ﬁndings are unexpected in light of a presumed continual increase

in globalisation, and have signiﬁcant implications for the design of programmes

aimed at promoting international research collaboration and knowledge diﬀusion.

Full list of author information is

available at the end of the article

†Corresponding author

Keywords: research collaboration; knowledge diﬀusion; economic development;

geopolitics; country network; community detection; data visualisation

1 Introduction

Following advances in transportation and communication technology over the past

centuries, we’re witnessing a rise in global interactions both in terms of cross-border

trade and investment as well as ﬂows of people and information. Termed globali-

sation, this complex process involves interaction and integration of people, busi-

nesses, and governments and while it primarily concerns economic aspects, social

and cultural dimensions are similarly salient. In parallel to the process of globali-

sation, ongoing global economic restructuring has resulted in a transition towards

a knowledge-based economy, where a ‘greater reliance on intellectual capabilities

than on physical or natural resources’ [Powell and Snellman, 2004] has meant a rise

in production and services that are based on knowledge-intensive activities. The

importance of specialised skills along with knowledge and information as forms of

non-physical capital has grown, since economic growth increasingly derives from in-

tangible intellectual property including copyrights, patents, trademarks, and trade

secrets that work to make more eﬀective use of inputs and available resources.

Knowledge diﬀusion and innovation underpin competition and fuel economic growth



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 2 of 27

at almost all stages of development, as well as play a critical role in enabling re-

sponses to complex economic, environmental, and social challenges. Domestic and

global research communities are central players in creating and diﬀusing knowl-

edge and contributing to the development of new products and processes. These

communities comprise of research and development activities, research laborato-

ries, universities, and other educational institutions that, together with partners in

the private sector and government, form innovation ecosystems [Jackson, 2011].

The role of innovation, science and technology as drivers of economic growth and as

vital enablers of sustainability is highlighted in the recent UNESCO [2015] Science

Report, which showcases the trajectories of a large number of countries ‘incorporat-

ing science, technology, and innovation in their national development agendas, in

order to be less reliant on raw materials and move towards knowledge economies.’

The desirability of fostering local skills and capacities for economic development is

similarly echoed by recent work in economic complexity and economic geography

[Hidalgo et al., 2007, Frenken and Boschma, 2007, Hidalgo and Hausmann, 2009,

Hausmann and Hidalgo, 2011, O’Clery et al., 2019a], analysing the growth of cities

and regions. This literature ﬁnds the availability of diverse knowledge capacities or

complex skills and capabilities as central to the development trajectories of regions,

countries, and cities. They conceptualise knowledge and capabilities as geograph-

ically ‘sticky’, since tacit knowledge and abilities are a result of a workforce with

skills learned on-the-job, and are thus not easily transportable. Research collabora-

tion, in particular with academics from other regions likely in possession of novel

or complementary skills and capabilities, could allow countries to upgrade their

academic capacity and respond to unique societal and economic challenges more

readily.

As countries and regions ﬁnd themselves at various stages of the transformation

towards - and readiness to join - the global knowledge economy [Ojanper¨a et al.,

2017, 2019], the creation of scientiﬁc knowledge is more important than ever. Public

and private sector funding is directed towards developing domestic research capa-

bilities, and countries are putting policies in place to attract scientiﬁc talent from

abroad [UNESCO, 2015]. The OECD Development strategy, implemented in part-

nership with the United Nations and the World Bank, as well as the OECD policy

frameworks for Tertiary Education, Innovation, Development, and Gender Equity,

all call for the promotion of regional and international research networks in order

to further the dual pursuit of research communities everywhere, summarised by the

Programme on Innovation, Higher Education and Research and for Development

(IHERD) [2012] as: ‘knowledge generation per se and their speciﬁc role in attaining

national development priorities’.

Reﬂecting this trend, the number of researchers and publications has been growing,

with a 20 percent increase between 2007 and 2014 [UNESCO, 2015]. The extent of

scientiﬁc collaboration has increased in parallel, both overall [Wagner-D¨obler, 2001,

Meyer and Bhattacharya, 2004], and internationally, between researchers based in

diﬀerent countries [Narin et al., 1991, Wagner and Leydesdorﬀ, 2005a, Wuchty et al.,

2007, Jones et al., 2008, Gazni et al., 2012]. Various factors have been suggested

as underpinning the growing propensity to collaborate, including advancements in



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 3 of 27

technologies facilitating remote collaboration [Ding et al., 2010], policy initiatives

and funding schemes to encourage international collaboration [Frenken et al., 2009,

Ubfal and Maﬃoli, 2011], specialisation requiring collaboration with researchers who

may not be available within the local talent pool, cultivation of research impact and

credibility [Kumar, 2015], and avoidance of duplicating research eﬀorts [Katz and

Martin, 1997].

Indeed, the internationalisation of research collaborations has received increasing

attention over the past few decades. Collaboratively authored research has higher

impact than research published by a sole author, both in terms of number of pub-

lications [Wuchty et al., 2007, Katz and Martin, 1997, Lee and Bozeman, 2005]

and citations [Sooryamoorthy, 2017, Gazni and Didegah, 2011], while research pub-

lished by international author teams tends to attract more citations than research

authored by national teams [Narin et al., 1991, Katz and Martin, 1997, Frenken

et al., 2005]. Furthermore, Jones et al. [2008] show that multi-university collabo-

rations produce the highest impact papers when top-tier universities are included,

and are increasingly stratiﬁed by in-group university rank.

An emergent body of literature on research collaboration networks - reviewed below

- has primarily investigated ties between individuals or institutions, often focusing

on particular disciplinary communities or bounded by a regional or sub-national

context. Few studies, however, have looked in detail at changing patterns of inter-

national collaboration focusing on bilateral ties at the country level, and including

all major disciplines. Instead studies tend to focus on particular disciplines, such

as medicine or the life sciences. We look at research collaboration across all major

disciplines, as it reﬂects the broad creation and diﬀusion of knowledge, which con-

tributes to the development of new products and processes, or innovation across

economic, social, and political domains.

The existing body of research on international research collaboration networks has

deployed a variety of network methods, including network visualisation, local net-

work measures focusing on the importance of nodes, models explaining network

growth, and regression methods. In the present study, we apply a range of so-

phisticated methods deriving from network science and mathematical modelling,

including historical proﬁle clustering, calculation of the entropy of collaborations,

community detection, and mutual information comparisons, which allow us to un-

cover patterns that have previously remained opaque.

Further, where studies have analysed a time period rather than investigated a snap-

shot, the time window tends to not span more than a decade or two. We address this

research gap through analysing a dataset of international collaboratively authored

scientiﬁc publications covering a range of disciplines published between 1970 and


## 2018. In doing so, we assess the extent to which countries learn from each other


through ‘borrowing’ capabilities and specialisms from colleagues in other countries

or regions, and thus induce knowledge ﬂow. In the analysis to follow, we exploit a

variety of network and mathematical modelling tools to analyse the temporal evolu-

tion of the global collaboration network to reveal what we term ‘knowledge basins’

(a concept related to ‘skill basins’ as proposed by O’Clery et al. [2019b]). These



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 4 of 27

are groups of countries which tend to collaborate frequently internally, but less fre-

quently with other groups, thus forming localised (and potentially isolated) clusters

of research output. These clusters evolve over time, aligning with colonial and his-

torical geopolitical alliances pre-2000, but coalescing more along geographical or

regional lines since 2000.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 will survey the relevant

research on co-authorship networks. Our choice of data will be elaborated upon in

Section 3, while Section 4 will introduce some preliminary analysis of the data.

In Sections 5 and 6 we will present our main research methodology and results

with some discussion. Finally, Section 7 summarises our contribution, discusses the

implications of our ﬁndings, and proposes avenues for future work.

2 Literature review

The literature on research networks has its roots in scientometrics, a sub-ﬁeld of

bibliometrics measuring and analysing scientiﬁc literature, but it additionally draws

from related disciplines of information systems, information science, and science of

science. While the creation of the Science Citation Index in 1964 and related studies

[Burton and Kebler, 1960, Garﬁeld and Sher, 1963, Kessler et al., 1962, Osgood and

Xhignesse, 1963, Price, 1963, Tukey, 1962] were seminal in establishing the ﬁeld,

the pioneering article by Price [1965] was the ﬁrst one to investigate networks of

scientiﬁc papers, and found that the network under study was scale-free with the

in-degree (citations within an article) and out-degree (citations to an article) hav-

ing power-law distributions. Since these early studies’ focus on citation networks,

the literature has branched out to comprise research on varied themes such as co-

citation networks (documents are connected if they appear together in a reference

list), co-word networks (words are connected if they appear together within a doc-

ument), research collaboration (in particular through co-authorship of documents

or collaborative grants), researcher mobility, and institutional boundaries. While

these studies investigate varied topics, some themes that have received substan-

tial research attention include identifying research fronts, evaluating the impact of

individual authors in comparison to collaborations, and the relative inﬂuence of

disciplines and journals.

2.1 Knowledge ﬂows and co-authorship networks

This paper contributes to the literature on research collaboration - and speciﬁcally

co-authorship - networks. In many cases, these are thought to be a proxy for knowl-

edge ﬂows, which are inherently challenging to deﬁne and measure. By knowledge

we mean the creation and retention of knowledge by individuals or organisations,

and by knowledge ﬂows we mean the exchange or diﬀusion of ideas by individuals or

organizations [Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 1998]. Such ‘pure’ knowledge and knowledge

ﬂows tend to be disembodied, and are non-rivalrous in the sense that one’s consump-

tion of knowledge does not prevent another from consuming the same knowledge.

While these kinds of knowledge are diﬃcult to measure chieﬂy due to their disem-

bodied nature, some have suggested that the ﬂows of certain knowledge-intensive

products such as citations to patents could work as ‘windows’ to knowledge ﬂows



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 5 of 27

[Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 1998]. In a similar vein, internationally co-authored pub-

lications, which are considered a reliable proxy for research collaboration [Melin

and Persson, 1996, Gl¨anzel and Schubert, 2005, Heinze and Kuhlmann, 2008], may

be considered as ‘windows’ into knowledge ﬂows between researchers located in

diﬀerent countries.

Co-authorship networks are some of the largest publicly available social networks

and while they have received somewhat less research attention than citation net-

works, they enable a close examination of key aspects of what Newman [2004] terms

as ‘the structure of both academic knowledge and academic society’. The existing

literature on co-authorship networks can roughly be divided into three streams

based on the methodological approaches utilised, namely, bibliometric methods,

survey-based methods, and network analysis. The studies applying a network anal-

ysis methodology form a somewhat more recent research area, and as our study

falls within this stream, we will focus our discussion on the literature using related


## methodologies.


This literature investigates networks that vary in size from small groups e.g. re-

lated to a research institution [Fagan et al., 2018] to massive graphs e.g. depicting

international patent citation networks [de Rassenfosse and Seliger, 2020]. The re-

search ﬁeld has gained notable interest after three seminal articles from Newman

[2001a,b,c], which studied the micro and macro characteristics of seven large scien-

tiﬁc co-authorship networks, and an article by Barab´asi et al. [2002] which examined

the evolution and dynamics of these networks. Among further studies which looked

at researcher collaboration networks, many focused on detecting popular or well

positioned individuals [Fatt et al., 2010, Racherla and Hu, 2010, Ye et al., 2012,

Santos and Santos, 2016]. Newman [2001b] noted that scientiﬁc networks are highly

clustered, with many triangles, while Goh et al. [2003] found that authors with a

high betweenness centrality avoid collaboration with other authors who are similarly

well-positioned, and rather seek less connected individuals.

Focusing on classifying the network structure, Newman [2001c] demonstrated that

co-authorship networks could be characterised by the ‘small world’ property i.e.,

each author is not more than ﬁve or six steps away from each other within the

network. Goh et al. [2002] found that the node degree distribution is scale free,

indicating that while most authors have few collaborations, there are some that

have numerous collaborations. Finding a similar pattern, Newman [2004] noted

that biological scientists have signiﬁcantly more coauthors than those publishing in

mathematics or physics. Various studies have looked at the existence and size of

the ‘giant component’, which seems to vary signiﬁcantly across disciplines. Newman

[2001c] found it comprises over 90 percent of authors in biomedical research, while

Yan and Ding [2009] found it comprises just 20 percent of authors in library and

information sciences. Hou et al. [2008] studied the network of authors within scien-

tometrics and found that the two largest research clusters work on the same topic,

but utilise diﬀerent methodological approaches. Comparing network communities to

the socioeconomic characteristics of the scholars, Rodriguez and Pepe [2008] found

that communities best align with individuals working in the same department or

institution suggesting that co-authorship is primarily driven by departmental and

institutional aﬃliation.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 6 of 27

2.1.1 International research collaboration

Studies adopting an international comparison include both regionally and globally

focused approaches. Investigating the growth of international collaboration, Wag-

ner and Leydesdorﬀ[2005b] argue that the principle of preferential attachment—

where those with more collaborations keep attracting proportionally more new

collaborations—explains the phenomenon. In support of this hypothesis, Ribeiro

et al. [2018] identify a scale free node degree distribution for a global collaboration

network comprising various scientiﬁc disciplines. Some authors argue that the core

leading group consisting of the United States and Western nations has widened to

include a much larger number of countries during the 1990’s and 2000’s [Leydes-

dorﬀet al., 2013]. Other studies focusing on international research collaborations

ﬁnd that geographical distance and national borders continue to hinder cross-border

collaboration [Frenken et al., 2009, Doria Arrieta et al., 2017]. Looking at the pat-

terns of medical research in Latin America and the Caribbean, Chinchilla-Rodr´ıguez

et al. [2012] ﬁnd that the most productive countries collaborate mainly internally

or with neighbouring countries, while small or developing countries tend to collab-

orate more distantly. Other studies suggest that the globalisation of science does

not seem to have evolved uniformly across all countries and regions, as historical,

sociotechnological, and geographical factors continue to play a key role [Geuna,

2015, Scherngell, 2013]. This existing body of research adopts either a temporal

snapshot into global research collaboration or covers a time window spanning up to

two decades.

2.1.2 Data sources

Previous research has made use of bibliographic databases, academic search engines

(ASEs), and services that oﬀer a combination of these two functions. Bibliographic


## databases are comprehensive and reliable collections of information on academic


outputs which allow users to eﬃciently query for information. ASEs on the other

hand use computer algorithms to search the internet and recognize items which

correspond to a query. They are less structured and subject to inconsistencies yet

tend to be signiﬁcantly larger in scope.

While it is challenging to measure the reach of these datasets, a recent arti-

cle by Gusenbauer [2019] attempted to measure their respective sizes. The two

largest scholarly bibliographic databases include Scopus (72m records) and Web

of Science (67m records). The ASEs oﬀer some signiﬁcantly larger datasets, and

comprise, among others, Google’s academic index Google Scholar (387m records),

WorldWideScience (323m records), AMiner (232m records), Microsoft Academic

(171m records), Bielefeld Academic Search Engine (BASE) (118m records), Q-

Sensei Scholar (55m records), and Semantic Scholar (40m records). Aggregate ser-

vices include ProQuest (280m records) and EbscoHost (132m records). While these

sources of data have gained popularity within the ﬁeld [Harzing and Alakangas,

2016], each has their advantages and limitations depending on the geographic, dis-

ciplinary, or temporal scale of interest.

3 The Scopus database

Our dataset contains all co-authorship relations between authors of documents pub-

lished between 1970 and 2018 which are indexed in Scopus. We chose Scopus as our



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 7 of 27


## data source because it has a high level of accuracy as is characteristic for biblio-


graphic databases [Gusenbauer, 2019, Gusenbauer and Haddaway, 2019]. It also has

wide geographic, disciplinary, and temporal coverage including 24,600 active titles

and 5,000 publishers of scientiﬁc journals, books, and conference proceedings across

the ﬁelds of science, technology, medicine, social sciences, and arts and humanities

[Elsevier, 2020]. Since we sought as comprehensive a dataset as possible, we decided

not to consider the academic search engines because, while they are able to access

the largest number of records, the query functions for them seem to be unreliable

for detailed bibliometric data such as author aﬃliation [Gusenbauer, 2019, Mingers

and Meyer, 2017]. Similarly, while the aggregate services ProQuest and EbscoHost

and the bibliographic database Web of Science provide more accurate results, it

was not apparent whether our institutional access to these services would cover

all constituent databases (a well-known shortcoming of these services [Gusenbauer,

2019]).

While there are obvious advantages to using the Scopus dataset, there are nonethe-

less several known limitations including weaker coverage for the social sciences and

humanities, and non-English publications [Aksnes and Sivertsen, 2019]. However,

some have argued [Bennett, 2013] that English has come to dominate academia as

a ‘lingua franca’ leading to erosion of scholarly discourses in other languages and

possibly introducing preferences for certain kinds of knowledge [Trahar et al., 2019].

While quantifying this trend isn’t possible within the scope of this analysis, it is

likely to introduce a shift in original contributions from other languages to English

over time and thus might increase the representativeness of our data. Furthermore,

while Scopus does not include all possible academic outputs, the categories indexed

are arguably some of the most salient kinds of academic outputs, and we would

not expect that other omitted categories of outputs would introduce a speciﬁc ge-

ographic bias into our ﬁndings.

Since we are interested in collaborative relationships on a country level and across

scientiﬁc disciplines, we ﬁrst produce a dataset including all publications with au-

thors in multiple countries (including papers with authors aﬃliated to multiple

institutions in diﬀerent countries), and aggregate this data to form yearly counts

of co-authorship relations between countries based on the geographical location of

each author’s institution. Speciﬁcally, if a paper or book is aﬃliated with institutions

from more than two countries, e.g., Norway, UK, and India, three co-authorship re-

lations will be included in this dataset: Norway-UK, Norway-India, and UK-India

(which could be regionally aggregated to one within Europe co-authorship relation-

ship and two between Europe and Asia co-authorship relationships). Subsequently,

we further aggregate the data into ten time periods: 1970-1974, 1975-1979, 1980-

1984, 1985-1989, 1990-1994, 1995-1999, 2000-2004, 2005-2009, 2010-2014, and 2015-


## 2018. The ﬁnal time period does not include 2019 as the Scopus database for this


year is as of yet incomplete[1].

[1]However as we only apply methods within each time period, this missing year

does not prevent us from considering this ﬁnal period.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 8 of 27

4 Trends in the global production of knowledge

The production of academic publications is highly unequally distributed geograph-

ically. Figure 1 (a) shows that the highest volume of publications is currently au-

thored in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, China, and India, while the

lowest numbers can be found within Africa and Latin America. Looking back over

the past ﬁve decades, Figure 1 (b) reveals that Asia is catching up with Europe and

the Americas, while the growth of academic publishing is much slower for Africa

and Oceania. We contrast this with the growth of co-authored publications and ﬁnd

that growth was much faster in Europe than other continents, in particular after

the turn of the century. While Asia is catching up to the Americas, international

collaborations are growing much slower than its share of overall publications.

Figure 1(d) displays the rank of countries in terms of the number of academic

publications in 1970, 1985, 2000, and 2015. We observe that while countries in

Europe and Asia as well as the United States and Canada are topping the list,

some emerging economies such as China, Korea, Iran, and Malaysia signiﬁcantly

increased in rank towards the end of the time period[2].

It is clear that national publication and co-authorship rates have been subject

to signiﬁcant change over the past decades. Before proceeding to disentangle co-

authorship patterns over time, we desire a simple method to systematically uncover

which countries are emerging as research leaders in terms of publication growth

(relative to size). To do so, we follow the method described in Gargiulo et al. [2016].

First, we calculate the relative abundance of publications of each country within

each time-step. That is, at each time-step, we compute the global share of publica-

tion activity of country i:

r1(i, t) =

n(t)

i

P

j n(t)

j

,

(1)

where n(t)

i

denotes the total number of publications produced by country i in time

period t. However, as shown in Figure 2 (a) for the countries Iraq, the UK, and

Greece, it is a poor measure to compare the historical proﬁles of countries with

dramatically diﬀerent levels of production. To overcome this, we normalise each

country’s relative abundance proﬁle by its total production across the full time

period to obtain a measure of average prevalence:

r2(i, t) =

r1(i, t)

P

t′ r1(i, t′).

(2)

To ensure fair comparison, here we require each country to have produced more than

100 publications in each and every time period. Figure 2 (b) displays this metric for

the same three countries, and now the relative trajectories of each country is clear:

the UK has slowly declined in relative publication share, while Greece proportion-

ally increased until 2010 (the subsequent decline may be due to the imposition of

[2]In the interest of readability, subﬁgure (d) omits any countries with less than 50

publications in one of the time periods, fewer than 100,000 inhabitants, and the

group of small island developing nations (SIDS) except Singapore.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 9 of 27

Figure 1: Subﬁgure (a) maps the total number of academic publications in

2018 (log). Subﬁgures (b) and (c) show the temporal evolution of the total

number of publications, and internationally coauthored publications, across

geographical regions between 1970 and 2018. Finally, subﬁgure (d) displays

the rank of countries in terms of the number of academic publications in

1970, 1985, 2000, and 2015. We observe some emerging economies such as

China, Korea, Iran, and Malaysia rising signiﬁcantly in rank towards the

end of the time period.

austerity). Iraq steeply declined in relative publication share from 1990 (possibly

due to conﬂict after the invasion of Kuwait) and has only recovered more recently.

We then use these proﬁles to cluster countries with similar historical trajectories.

We ﬁrst calculate the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance between each pair of country

proﬁles (the supremum diﬀerence between the cumulative distribution of each pro-

ﬁle [Smirnov and Smirnov, 1939]), then use this distance matrix as the input for

an agglomerative clustering algorithm. This algorithm works by ﬁrst setting the

maximum number of clusters to six (by looking at the corresponding clustering

dendrogram), then ﬁnding the minimum threshold r such that the distance be-

tween any two points within each cluster is less than r, and there are at most six

clusters—see e.g., M¨ullner [2011]. These clustered proﬁles are displayed in Figure 2

(c), where each line corresponds to the average prevalence value of a cluster—note

that as such Clusters 1 and 3 seem comparable, but the variance of proﬁles within

Cluster 3 is much greater.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 10 of 27

Figure 2: Subﬁgure (a) displays relative abundance proﬁles for Iraq, the

UK and Greece. While the decline in relative share of global publications

from the UK is clear, it is diﬃcult to compare with other countries due to

diﬀering overall levels of production. Thus in subﬁgure (b) we display the

average prevalence for the same three countries (in same colours as (a))—it

is clear that while the relative share of the UK has slowly declined, for

Greece it was increasing until 2010 (the subsequent decline may be due to

the imposition of austerity). For Iraq we see a period of decline (during

conﬂict) between 1990-2010, from which it is now recovering. In subﬁgure

(c) we show the average prevalence of ﬁve groups of countries obtained

from clustering their historical proﬁles. Two clusters display rapid growth

in recent periods (red and purple), while two others display high variability

(yellow and green). The ﬁnal group (blue) features countries with stable or

moderately declining proﬁles. Finally, in subﬁgure (d) we map these groups

(in same colours as (c)), with the majority of the Global North belonging

to stable or declining clusters while the Global South remains dynamic.

In Figure 2 (d) we display a map of the world coloured by these clusters. Five proﬁles

are typical: the blue cluster (Cluster 1) corresponds to countries with reasonably

stable proﬁles over the period investigated, such as Norway and much of the Global

North. The green and yellow clusters (Clusters 2 and 3) include countries with

periods of relative growth and decline, such as the UK and Greece. Finally, the red

and purple clusters (Clusters 4 and 5) correspond to countries that have greatly

increased their publication share in recent years such as Iraq. Amongst these, every

region of the Global South has countries which have considerably improved their

trajectory in recent times, from Colombia in South America to China in Asia.

The international research landscape is clearly undergoing continued structural

change with new leaders emerging from all corners of the globe. Here we ask, how has

this shift in the geographic spread and dynamics of knowledge production shaped

a re-conﬁguration of cross border collaboration ties?



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 11 of 27

5 The dynamics of international vs regional collaboration diversity

We wish to quantify how countries have changed their patterns of collaboration over

time, focusing particularly on neighbouring and distant ties. One way to do this is

to measure a countries’ diversity of links to collaboration partners both within their

own region and with countries in other regions.

In order to do this, we ﬁrst calculate the Shannon entropy (see e.g., Evans et al.

[2011], Kumar et al. [1986]) of the distribution of collaboration partners for each

country. This provides us with a measure of the spread of collaborations for each

country: values closer to one correspond to countries collaborating evenly with many

countries around the world, and low values correspond to a narrow focus on collab-

oration with few countries. To be speciﬁc, we deﬁne the collaboration entropy for

country i as

CE(i, t) = −

1

log(N −1)

j̸=i

p(t)

ij log p(t)

ij ,

(3)

X

where N is the total number of countries in our dataset in the time period[3], and

p(t)

ij =

n(t)

ij

P

j̸=i n(t)

ij

,

(4)

where n(t)

ij is the number of collaborations of academics from country i with those

in country j in time period t.

We are interested in investigating whether countries are collaborating more diversely

within their region compared to outside their own region (continent). Hence, we

decompose CE as follows:

CEin(i, t)

=

−

1

log(N −1)

j∈Ju

p(t)

ij log p(t)

ij

(5)

X

CEout(i, t)

=

−

1

log(N −1)

j∈Jo

p(t)

ij log p(t)

ij ,

(6)

X

where Ju is the set of countries in the region of country i, and Jo is the set of

countries outside the region of country i. Diversity increasing within regions when

compared to diversity between regions suggests stronger regional clustering, and

impacts a variety of network measures analysed later. In particular, if the total

strength of internal collaborations relative to external collaborations also increases

(as veriﬁed in Appendix B and shown in Figure 6), it implies the formation of

localised regional collaboration networks, or knowledge basins within which knowl-

edge circulates more easily.

We plot CEin versus CEout for the ﬁnal time period for all countries in Figure 3

(a), where the size of the points is scaled by the total number of collaborations. We

[3]Note: again only countries which produced more than 100 total publications in

all time periods are included here so as to ensure comparability across time.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 12 of 27

Figure 3: Subﬁgure (a) displays the collaboration entropy measure within

and outside of the region of each country in the ﬁnal time period, with

points scaled by the total number of collaborations. We observe that Eu-

ropean countries tend to have diverse collaborations within their region

relative to those further aﬁeld, while for many countries in Africa or the

Americas the reverse is true. Subﬁgure (b) plots the average proportion of

within-region entropy (as a share of total entropy) for each continent. We

observe that Africa and Asia have greatly increased their focus on diverse

within-region collaboration since 1970.

observe that European countries (shown in red) seem to collaborate more diversely

with each other than with the rest of the world, while for many African countries

(shown in blue) the reverse seems to be the case.

In order to assess the dynamics of inter- and intra-region collaboration diversity

over time, we compute the proportion of within-region entropy (as a share of total

entropy) for each country:

C(i, t)

=

CEin(i, t)

CEin(i, t) + CEout(i, t).

(7)

We plot the mean value—across countries in a region—of this quantity over time

in Figure 3(b). We may observe that within-region diversity was high but has been

slowly declining in Europe since 1995, suggesting the region is broadening its focus

to some extent. On the other hand, within-region collaboration diversity increased

signiﬁcantly for the Americas and Asia from the 1980s, and for Africa after 1990.

However, there appears to be a general small decline in within-region diversity

(relative to out-of-region collaboration diversity) in the ﬁnal two time periods for

the Americas, suggesting a recent opening up of their collaboration networks.

6 The evolving structure of research clusters in the global

collaboration network

The change in research focus, from international to regional collaboration, observed

in the previous section provokes a more general investigation of how knowledge ﬂows

(as proxied by academic collaborations) may have changed over time. In particular,

we ask whether these trends have translated into an overall consolidation of regional

ties, creating isolated clusters or pools of knowledge production.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 13 of 27

To uncover the complex structure of these ﬂows, we construct a network where

the nodes are countries, and the edges correspond to the number of collaborations

between countries i and j at time t, n(t)

ij , such that the network at this time has

adjacency matrix, A(t), with the corresponding i, jth entries.

Prior to further analysis, to immediately visualise signiﬁcant partnerships, we follow

a similar procedure to that proposed by Neﬀke and Henning [2013] for estimating

skill-overlap between industry pairs based on inter-industry job transitions. The

logic behind doing so is similar to that for revealed comparative advantage (RCA,

see e.g. Balassa [1965]), in that measures calculated on the network formed by raw

counts are typically dominated by those locations with the highest overall produc-

tion (i.e. USA, China and similar). Instead, we normalise the observed counts by

the capacity of each country, measured by total collaborations, using a conﬁgura-

tion model-like approach, apply a transformation to help account for the spread of

subsequent results, and ﬁnally apply a thresholding step. The details may be found

in Appendix C.

In Figure 4, we display this transformed network, with edges with strengths given

by equation (C.2), for the ﬁve-year periods commencing in 1970, 1985, 2000, and

for 2015-2018, where countries which belong to the same continent have the same

colour, and the size of each country is proportional to their total number of publi-

cations within that time period. The spring algorithm ForceAtlas in Gephi is used

to layout each network, and edges above a 0.5 threshold are shown.

We observe that countries tend to cluster together geographically in latter time

periods. This can be seen with respect to the United Kingdom and Germany: in

earlier time periods they occupy fairly central ‘positions’, but in the latter time

periods locate more closely to other European countries. On the other hand, while

we note that the rise of publication volume in China and India is visible particu-

larly over the past two decades, the positions of these countries along with Japan

remain relatively close to their regional groups. In Figure 4(e), we display the mean

edge weights between the ﬁve continents in the form of aggregated adjacency ma-

trices. We observe the emergence of a deﬁned diagonal from the year 2000, while

the oﬀ-diagonals grow paler. This indicates that intra-regional collaborations have

strengthened, while the inter-continental collaborations appear to decline. Once

again, we observe that in the most recent time period this trend may be beginning

to change, with more intercontinental partnerships emerging.

In order to explore the increasing ‘regionalisation’ of research collaboration, we

wish to extract information from the networks about groups of countries engaged

in intense research collaboration across time. Exploring such groupings is a key

focus of network science, known as community detection. Loosely speaking, this

corresponds to a partition of nodes into communities for which within-community

links are signiﬁcantly stronger that between-community links. It is often found to

be the case that these naturally arise in the real world, e.g. in social, neurological, or

indeed academic networks as under consideration here [Newman and Girvan, 2004].

Here, such communities reveal groupings of countries which engage in signiﬁcant

research collaboration – and analysis of their evolution over time enables us to

extract a quantitative description of the changing global research landscape.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 14 of 27

(a)

2015

1970

(b)

CN

JP

IN

DE

GB

(c)

1985

DE

JP

CN

GB

IN

4..

a

2000

(d)

CN

JP

IN

(e)

1970

1985

2000

2015

4.a.

Coau

4.a.

Coau

4.a.

Coau

0.7

tho

tho

tho

0.3

GB

0.1

DE

Figure 4: Subﬁgure (a) shows the global collaboration network constructed

for data between 2015-18. The algorithm ForceAtlas is used to layout the

network, with edges above a 0.5 edge-weight threshold shown. Node sizes

are scaled according to the total number of publications during this period,

labeled with the ISO2 code corresponding to each country, and coloured

according to geographical regions. Subﬁgures (b)-(d) show analogous net-

works constructed for periods 1970-74, 1985-89, and 2000-04. Finally, sub-

ﬁgure (e) displays mean edge weights between the ﬁve continents in the

form of adjacency matrices. We observe a concentration of edge weights

within regions, as seen by the shaded diagonal entries, particularly from


## 2000. Colours correspond to the same continent in each plot.


While a variety of methods exist (see e.g. Javed et al. [2018] for an overview), the

approach we take is that of optimisation of linearised stability [Delvenne et al.,

2010, Lambiotte et al., 2008, 2011] . Given a partition X, this method involves

computing a sum of the deviations of the network edges within each community

from a weighted conﬁguration null model (where edges are shuﬄed randomly but

node strengths are preserved). Mathematically,



Aij −γ kikj



δ(xi, xj),

(8)

Qconf(X) =

1

2m

X

2m

i,j

where

ki =

X

j

Aij,

2m =

X

i

ki,

(9)



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 15 of 27

are respectively the strength of node i and total edge weight of the network, xi

is the community of node i (thus δ(xi, xj) = 1 if i and j are in same community

and is zero else), and γ is a so called ‘resolution’ parameter. This ﬁnal parameter

controls the contribution of the null model to the sum, and so aﬀects which partition

will be optimal – larger values favour recovering smaller communities, and vice

versa. Under the conﬁguration null model, the expected strength of link between

i and j is kikj/2m—i.e., the total strength of node j times the probability of

connecting to node i. In particular, using this null model, if γ = 1 linearised stability

is identical to the conventional Newman-Girvan modularity [Newman and Girvan,

2004]. This linearised form is also eﬀectively identical to another method previously

introduced in Reichardt and Bornholdt [2006] for modularity at diﬀerent network

scales. This tuning parameter is highly useful, as it allows us to avoid to some extent

the resolution limit that typical modularity has been shown to face [Fortunato

and Barthelemy, 2007], in that it is possible to fail to detect non-trivial small

communities.

The principal idea behind stability is that if we follow walkers around the network,

which jump between nodes with a probability proportional to the edge weight, then

over time sets of nodes where walkers spend a prolonged period suggest denser

connections within such a set than to outside, i.e. they form form a community.

The period of time for which we track such walkers naturally leads to the resolution

parameter γ. More details on this are provided in Appendix D.

In order to ﬁnd a node partition X which maximises this function, a typical ap-

proach is to use a greedy algorithm by Blondel et al. [2008]. This works by initially

placing each node in its own community, then iteratively merging nodes with those

adjacent to themselves if an increase in linearised stability is achieved. This process

is stochastic in the sense that it may produce a slightly diﬀerent optimum partition

depending on the order in which nodes are ‘visited’. It is eﬃcient as only local infor-

mation (nearest neighbours) to the node is necessary at each step. Recently there

has been a further improvement with a similar logic, known as the Leiden algorithm

[Traag et al., 2019]: this appears to result in higher linearised stability with lower

computational cost, and so will be used here. Through studying the variation of in-

formation (a metric for comparing partitions) as described in Appendix D, we ﬁnd

that two resolution times τ = 1/γ of interest are τ = 1.0 (i.e. actually conventional

modularity) and τ = 0.76, which provides a ﬁner-grained view of the network.

We display the best partitions X(t) found from applying this optimisation process,

with τ = 1.0, to the network constructed for each time period in Figure 5(e).

Following a similar approach to that of Pietil¨anen and Diot [2012] and Fagan et al.

[2018], ’ﬂows’ between two communities A and B are scaled according to the Jaccard

index J(A, B) = |A∩B|/|A∪B|. We ﬁrst assign each community a colour arbitrarily,

then compare adjacent time periods and retain the previous colour if J(A, B) > 0.6.

The white community corresponds to countries outside of the time period under

consideration. This ﬁgure contains a wealth of information, for instance evidencing

that collaboration patterns often changed more regularly in earlier, more turbulent

decades, before beginning to settle from 1995 onwards. It may be seen for example

that Europe consolidates as a block at this scale from 1995 onwards, shortly after



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 16 of 27

the formation of the European Economic Area (EEA). We observe that in the ﬁnal

time period, there are four communities which roughly correspond to the regions

of Europe and Latin America, North America with China, Australia and nearby

countries, and the rest of the world. The community of North America et al. may

be an artefact of the USA and China being the two major global producers, and

suggests that an alternative null model could be more suitable depending on the goal

of analysis – we explore the deviation from the null model further in Appendix E,

but leave the development of such an alternative to future work.

In order to further investigate the rate of change of the modular structure over time,

and the observed ‘regionalisation’ of research collaboration ties, we wish to quantify

the similarity between each partition and its preceding partition, and between each

partition and the ‘continental partition’ (where countries are assigned to a commu-

nity based on continent). While the Jaccard index is good measure for comparing

pairs of communities, to compare partitions we instead calculate the normalised

mutual information (also known as the symmetric uncertainty [Witten and Frank,

2002]). This is deﬁned by

P

i,j rij log (rij/piqj)

P

NMI(X, Y ) = 2

ℓqℓlog qℓ

,

(10)

k pk log pk + P

for two partitions X and Y , where n is the number of nodes, and pi = |Xi|/n (the

share of nodes in community i of X), qi = |Yi|/n (the share of nodes in community

i of Y ), and rij = |Xi ∩Yj|/n (the share of nodes in both community i of X, and

community j of Y ).

We compare the partitions obtained in adjacent time-steps through calculating the

normalised mutual information: i.e. NMI(X(t), X(t+1)), where X(t) is the partition

obtained for time period t. In Figure 5 (f), we display the values of this function

over time at two diﬀerent scales, with τ = 1.0 shown solid, and the ﬁner scale

τ = 0.76 shown dashed. We observe that after an initial period of change, recent

years have seen relatively stable global research communities form at the ﬁner scale,

while at the more aggregate scale there is still some change (primarily due to splits

in the large, ‘rest of the world’, community shown in purple). Next, we construct

a new partition, C, which divides the world into ﬁve continents (communities):

each country is assigned to their continent, i.e. Africa, America, Asia, Europe, and

Oceania. In order to see how similar each partition is to this continental partition,

we calculate NMI(X(t), C) for all t. Figure 5 (g) conﬁrms what we had suspected

from previous ﬁgures in that there has been a clear trend towards regionalisation

of research ties at both scales, particularly between 1990-2010.

As a ﬁnal check, we compare the stability of each detected partition to the stability

of the continental partition. Since stability is a measure of partition quality, we

would expect the stability of the continental to approach that of the detected par-

tition in latter time periods. It is important to understand the diﬀerence in quality

between these partitions, particularly as there is inherent randomness to the opti-

misation algorithm used, and it only guarantees convergence to a local optima. In

other words, the ‘optimal’ partition we ﬁnd could in fact be only marginally better



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 17 of 27

Figure 5: In subﬁgures (a) and (b), we display the communities found in the

global collaboration network constructed from data between 1970-74 and

2015-18 respectively, using τ = 1/γ = 0.76. We can observe for instance

that in 2015, Europe in particular appears highly (sub-)regional, and much

of Oceania becomes its own separate community at this ﬁner scale. Subﬁg-

ures (c) and (d) show communities in these same periods, coloured as in the

Sankey plot in (f) below, but found instead with τ = 1.0. We observe that

while in 1970 these communities were globally distributed (in some cases

along colonial lines), in 2015 they appear to overall be more regionally fo-

cused. This is supported by subﬁgure (e), where communities are connected

between adjacent periods if their Jaccard (similarity) index is greater than

0.6. Subﬁgure (f) compares the community structure of adjacent time peri-

ods using the NMI, showing generally increasing stability of the community

structure over time. Subﬁgure (g) compares each partition to a partition

where nodes are split into continents, highlighting the increasing similarity

of the communities to continents over time. Finally, subﬁgure (h) displays

the ratio of the stability of each partition to the continental partition, with

the dashed red line at 1 thus corresponding to equal stability, further sup-

porting the latter insight. For each of subﬁgures (f), (g) and (h), results for

communities found with τ = 1.0 are shown solid, and dashed for τ = 0.76.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 18 of 27

than the continental partition in early decades, even if the partitions themselves

were very diﬀerent as measured by NMI. We cannot compare raw values of stabil-

ity across time, as it varies with respect to network size/density etc.—as such, we

compute the ratio

Qrat(X(t), C) = Qconf(X(t))

Qconf(C) .

(11)

The ratio of the stability scores tells us how well the geographic (or continental)

partition ‘performs’ as a set of communities compared to those detected by our

community detection algorithm. Figure 5 (h) conﬁrms that, as expected, this ratio

declines over time. More speciﬁcally, we observe that the continental partition was

of signiﬁcantly lower quality in earlier time periods, particularly for the scale with

τ = 1.0, suggesting this was not a good ‘description’ of the network structure at that

time. In later periods, the ratio approaches 1 (shown dashed red) at both scales,

suggesting that the continental partition is increasingly a good ﬁt for the network

structure.

7 Discussion

The creation and diﬀusion of knowledge between nations is crucial for the advance-

ment of skills and capabilities, critical drivers of economic development. Patterns

of knowledge diﬀusion via research collaboration on a global level, however, remain

poorly understood. We address this research gap through analysing a worldwide


## dataset of international scientiﬁc publications spanning all major disciplines over


ﬁve decades. We ﬁnd that collaboration ties appear to have become more localised

since 2000, with researchers prioritising regional co-authorship relative to more dis-

tant ties. We corroborate this insight via an analysis of the evolving modular struc-

ture of the global collaboration network, ﬁnding a recent stabilisation of research

clusters along increasingly regional lines.

These ﬁndings were unexpected given the generally accepted wisdom on the onward

march of globalisation, and thus have a number of signiﬁcant implications. On

one hand, this could be a positive signal: research expertise is growing in many

previously under-equipped nations and regions, and hence scholars no longer have

to look as far aﬁeld as they once did. Regional research eﬀorts may be driven

by resident researchers focusing their eﬀorts on addressing particular economic,

social, and political concerns within the region. Speciﬁc research programmes have

been introduced to strengthen scientiﬁc collaboration within regions such as the

Horizon 2020 (soon to give way to Horizon Europe) initiative in Europe. Further,

regional research and development programmes increasingly make use of the ‘smart

specialisation’ model in research, whereby countries with well-deﬁned domains of

specialisation (e.g., in research and innovation) are seen as more likely to produce

research excellency in speciﬁc areas. These countries are then chosen as sites for

related regional research programmes and institutes, with the aim of anchoring and

nurturing these localised sites of expertise. This model was originally developed

by the European Union in order to address a transatlantic gap in R&D but has

since been adopted by many regions and countries [G´omez Prieto et al., 2019]—

a trend that our research ﬁndings would seem to support and perhaps a driving



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 19 of 27

force behind some of the patterns we have identiﬁed. On the other hand, such

a retrenchment may be worrying, given what we know about the importance of

capability building and knowledge diﬀusion through ‘on-the-job’ learned experience,

leading to an uneven distribution of capabilities across regions. Indeed, the role of

donors in strengthening local research capacity through international collaborations

in many lower and middle-income economies has been deemed crucial, as these

countries tend to lack research capacity and face problems translating research

into impact. In this respect, it seems more important than ever that large research

funders such as those within the EU and the US support international collaboration

on a scale that far outstrips current levels. While funders, such as the US Agency for

International Development’s (USAID) Partnerships for Enhanced Engagement in

Research or the UK’s Newton Fund already have dedicated mechanisms to support

North-South research partnerships, this could mean expansion of National Science

Foundation (NSF) programmes to allow non-US research leads, or a U-turn in

the recent decrease in funding allocated to the much-feted Fulbright programme

(which supported two of the authors of this paper to spend time in the US). One

bright spot is the recent growth of development-oriented research funding in the

UK, the Global Challenges Research Fund (which supported this work), that not

only supports equitable UK-developing nation collaboration but mandates it. It is

only with large scale investment in such programmes that international research

collaboration will continue to play a vital role in global capability building.

While previous work comparing data sources on academic publishing highlight the

comparative strength of the Scopus dataset, we are aware that there are limitations

to this data given our interest in comparison between countries. The database’s

coverage is thought to be weaker for the social sciences and humanities, and for lit-

eratures in other languages than English [Aksnes and Sivertsen, 2019]. Furthermore,

we cannot ascertain that the indexing of work from publishers located in countries

where academia is less well resourced is as complete as for countries with more es-

tablished academes. Additionally, our dataset includes journal articles, books, and

conference proceedings, but no other types of academic outputs. Ideally one would

complement this analysis with additional material from academic search engines

such as Google Scholar, which contains up to four times as many documents as

Scopus. However, due to well-known issues such as document duplication, false ci-

tations, and unstable search indexing, this would require a major investment in


## data cleaning and processing.


There are a few clear avenues for future work. Firstly, much remains to be under-

stood about the nature and evolution of global collaboration networks, and the roles

of individual actors. For example, it would be interesting to investigate whether we

can identify global hegemons, countries playing the role of gatekeeper between lesser

regional partners and the rest of the world. Similarly, our work suggests that colonial

links and geopolitical alliances shaped, for a time, regional basins of knowledge. Has

this transition from historical blocs to regional clusters positively (or negatively)

impacted the research capacity of less developed nations? In other words, who have

been the winners and losers from this shift in network structure?



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 20 of 27

Finally, there is ample scope and reason to further investigate the structure of global

research ties and knowledge diﬀusion beyond inter-country links. First and fore-

most, research quality and disciplinary focus is often highly institution—rather than

country—speciﬁc. Furthermore, funding programmes often target speciﬁc ﬁelds and

institutions. For these reasons amongst others, it would be fruitful to dis-aggregate

the global collaboration network by institution and ﬁeld. Perhaps collaborations in

certain disciplines are heavily demarcated along regional lines, while others ﬂourish

under international collaboration. Perhaps top-tier institutions maintain interna-

tional links, while second-tier institutions focus more on regional ties. Additionally,

there are a large number of possible metrics one might compare to co-authorship

ties, including researcher mobility patterns. I.e, is the recent regional retrenchment

in collaboration patterns also observed in researcher mobility patterns?

Abbreviations

ASE: Academic Search Engine IHERD: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Project on

Innovation, Higher Education and Research & for Development NSF: National Science Foundation OECD:

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development RD: Research and development UNESCO: United

Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization

Declaration

Acknowledgements

This work uses Scopus data provided by Elsevier through the International Center for the Study of Research (ICSR)

Lab.

Funding

This publication is based on work partially supported by the EPSRC Centre For Doctoral Training in Industrially

Focused Mathematical Modelling (EP/L015803/1) in collaboration with Elsevier (John Fitzgerald).

Sanna Ojanper¨a is currently funded by The Alan Turing Institute doctoral grant TU/C/000020.

This article was completed with support from the PEAK Urban programme, funded by UKRI’s Global Challenge

Research Fund, Grant Ref: ES/P011055/1 (Neave O’Clery).

Availability of data and materials

The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from Elsevier (Scopus) but restrictions apply to the

availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available.


## Data are however available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of Elsevier.


Author’s contributions

NOC, JF and SO designed the study and the methodology, JF and SO processed and analysed the results.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not Applicable.

Consent for publication

Not Applicable.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author details

1Mathematical Institute, Oxford University, Andrew Wiles Building, Radcliﬀe Observatory Quarter, OX2 6GG,

Oxford, UK.

2Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, ASD, Oxford, United Kingdom.

3The

Bartlett Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

4The Alan

Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.


## References


Walter W. Powell and Kaisa Snellman. The Knowledge Economy. Annu. Rev. Sociol., 30(1):199–220, 2004. ISSN

0360-0572. .

Deborah Jackson. What is an innovation ecosystem. Technical Report 1(2), National Science Foundation, 2011.

UNESCO. UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030. Technical report, Imprimerie Centrale, Luxembourg, 2015. URL

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000235406.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 21 of 27

C. A. Hidalgo, B. Klinger, A.-L. Barab´asi, and R. Hausmann. The Product Space Conditions the Development of

Nations. Science, 317(5837):482–487, July 2007. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. . URL

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/317/5837/482. Publisher: American Association for the

Advancement of Science Section: Research Article.

Koen Frenken and Ron A Boschma. A theoretical framework for evolutionary economic geography: Industrial

dynamics and urban growth as a branching process. Journal of Economic Geography, 7:635–649, 2007.

C´esar A Hidalgo and Ricardo Hausmann. The building blocks of economic complexity. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, 106(26):10570–10575, 2009.

Ricardo Hausmann and C´esar A Hidalgo. The network structure of economic output. Journal of Economic Growth,

16(4):309–342, 2011.

Neave O’Clery, Rafael Prieto Curiel, and Eduardo Lora. Commuting times and the mobilisation of skills in emergent

cities. Applied Network Science, 4(1):118, 2019a.

Sanna Ojanper¨a, Mark Graham, Ralph Straumann, Stefano De Sabbata, and Matthew Zook. Engagement in the

Knowledge Economy: Regional Patterns of Content Creation with a Focus on Sub-Saharan Africa. Information

Technologies & International Development, 13(0):33–51, March 2017. ISSN 1544-7529. URL

http://itidjournal.org/index.php/itid/article/view/1479.

Sanna Ojanper¨a, Mark Graham, and Matthew Zook. The Digital Knowledge Economy Index: Mapping Content

Production: The Journal of Development Studies: Vol 55, No 12. The Journal of Development Studies, 55(12):

2626–2643, 2019. . URL https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00220388.2018.1554208.

Programme on Innovation, Higher Education and Research and for Development (IHERD). Research Universities:

Networking the Knowledge Economy, 2012.

Roland Wagner-D¨obler. Continuity and Discontinuity of Collaboration Behaviour since 1800 — from a Bibliometric

Point of View. Scientometrics, 52(3):503–517, 2001. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Martin Meyer and Sujit Bhattacharya. Commonalities and diﬀerences between scholarly and technical collaboration.

Scientometrics, 61(3):443–456, 2004. ISSN 0138-9130. .

F. Narin, K. Stevens, and Edith Whitlow. Scientiﬁc co-operation in Europe and the citation of multinationally

authored papers. Scientometrics, 21(3):313–323, 1991. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Caroline S. Wagner and Loet Leydesdorﬀ. Mapping the network of global science: comparing international

co-authorships from 1990 to 2000. International Journal Of Technology And Globalisation, 1(2):pp185–208,

2005a. ISSN 1476-5667.

Stefan Wuchty, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi. The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of

Knowledge. Science, 316(5827):1036–1039, May 2007. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. . URL

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/316/5827/1036.

Benjamin F. Jones, Stefan Wuchty, and Brian Uzzi. Multi-university research teams: shifting impact, geography, and

stratiﬁcation in science. Science (New York, N.Y.), 322(5905):1259–1262, November 2008. ISSN 1095-9203. .

Ali Gazni, Cassidy R. Sugimoto, and Fereshteh Didegah. Mapping world scientiﬁc collaboration: Authors,

institutions, and countries. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(2):

323–335, 2012. ISSN 1532-2890. . URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.21688.

Waverly W. Ding, Sharon G. Levin, Paula E. Stephan, and Anne E. Winkler. The Impact of Information Technology

on Academic Scientists’ Productivity and Collaboration Patterns. Management Science, 56(9):1439–1461, 2010.

ISSN 0025-1909. .

Koen Frenken, Jarno Hoekman, Suzanne Kok, Roderik Ponds, Frank van Oort, and Joep van Vliet. Death of

Distance in Science? A Gravity Approach to Research Collaboration. In Andreas Pyka and Andrea Scharnhorst,

editors, Innovation Networks: New Approaches in Modelling and Analyzing, Understanding Complex Systems,

pages 43–57. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. ISBN 978-3-540-92267-4. . URL

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-92267-4_3.

Diego Ubfal and Alessandro Maﬃoli. The impact of funding on research collaboration: Evidence from a developing

country. Research Policy, 40(9):1269–1279, November 2011. ISSN 0048-7333. . URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048733311001041.

Sameer Kumar. Co-authorship networks: a review of the literature. Aslib Journal of Information Management, 67

(1):55–73, January 2015. ISSN 2050-3806. . URL https://doi.org/10.1108/AJIM-09-2014-0116.

J. Sylvan Katz and Ben R. Martin. What is research collaboration? Research Policy, 26(1):1–18, 1997. ISSN

0048-7333. .

Sooho Lee and Barry Bozeman. The Impact of Research Collaboration on Scientiﬁc Productivity. Social Studies of

Science, 35(5):673–702, 2005. ISSN 0306-3127. .

Radhamany Sooryamoorthy. Do types of collaboration change citation? A scientometric analysis of social science

publications in South Africa. Scientometrics, 111(1):379–400, 2017. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Ali Gazni and Fereshteh Didegah. Investigating diﬀerent types of research collaboration and citation impact: a case

study of Harvard University’s publications. Scientometrics, 87(2):251–265, 2011. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Koen Frenken, Werner H¨olzl, and Friso de Vor. The citation impact of research collaborations: the case of European

biotechnology and applied microbiology (1988–2002). Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 22

(1-2):9–30, 2005. ISSN 0923-4748. .

Neave O’Clery, Eoin Flaherty, and Stephen Kinsella. Modular structure in labour networks reveals skill basins.

arXiv:1909.03379 [econ, q-ﬁn], September 2019b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03379. arXiv: 1909.03379.

R. E Burton and R. W Kebler. The “half-life” of some scientiﬁc and technical literatures. Amer. Doc. American

Documentation, 11(1):18–22, 1960. ISSN 0096-946X. OCLC: 4647127545.

E. Garﬁeld and I. H. Sher. New factors in the evaluation of scientiﬁc literature through citation indexing. American

Documentation, 14(3):195–201, 1963. ISSN 0096-946X. .

Maxwell Mirton Kessler, F. E Heart, National Science Foundation (U.S.), Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Libraries, and Lincoln Laboratory. Analysis of bibliographic sources in the physical review (vol. 77, 1950 to vol.

112, 1958). Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., 1962. OCLC: 339864.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 22 of 27

Charles E. Osgood and Louis V. Xhignesse. Characteristics of bibliographical coverage in psychological journals

published in 1950 and 1960. Institute of Communicatios Research, University of Illinois, 1963.

Derek J. de Solla Price. Little science, big science. Number 1962 in George B. Pegram lecture series. Columbia

University Press, New York, 1963. ISBN 978-0-231-08562-5.

John W. Tukey. Keeping Research in Contact with the Literature: Citation Indices and Beyond. Journal of Chemical

Documentation, 2(1):34–37, 1962. ISSN 0021-9576. .

D. J. Price. NETWORKS OF SCIENTIFIC PAPERS. Science (New York, N.Y.), 149(3683):510–515, 1965. ISSN

0036-8075. .

Adam B Jaﬀe and Manuel Trajtenberg. International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent Citations. Working

Paper 6507, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 1998. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w6507.

G. Melin and O. Persson. Studying research collaboration using co-authorships. Scientometrics, 36(3):363–377,


## 1996. ISSN 0138-9130. .


Wolfgang Gl¨anzel and Andr´as Schubert. Analysing Scientiﬁc Networks Through Co-Authorship. In Henk F. Moed,

Wolfgang Gl¨anzel, and Ulrich Schmoch, editors, Handbook of Quantitative Science and Technology Research:

The Use of Publication and Patent Statistics in Studies of S&T Systems, pages 257–276. Springer Netherlands,

Dordrecht, 2005. ISBN 978-1-4020-2755-0. . URL https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-2755-9_12.

Thomas Heinze and Stefan Kuhlmann. Across institutional boundaries? Research collaboration in German public

sector nanoscience. Research Policy, 37(5):888–899, 2008. ISSN 0048-7333. .

M. Newman. Coauthorship networks and patterns of scientiﬁc collaboration. Proceedings of the National Academy

of Sciences, 101(suppl 1):5200–5205, April 2004. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. . URL

https://www.pnas.org/content/101/suppl_1/5200.

Jesse Fagan, Katherine S. Eddens, Jennifer Dolly, Nathan L. Vanderford, Heidi Weiss, and Justin S. Levens.

Assessing Research Collaboration through Co-Authorship Network Analysis. Journal of Research Administration,

49(1):76–99, 2018. ISSN 1539-1590. URL http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=EJ1181982.

Ga´etan de Rassenfosse and Florian Seliger. Sources of knowledge ﬂow between developed and developing nations.

Science and Public Policy, 47(1):16–30, February 2020. ISSN 0302-3427. . URL

https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/47/1/16/5580327.

M. Newman. Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. I. Network construction and fundamental results. Physical review. E,

Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics, 64(1 Pt 2):016131, 2001a. ISSN 1539-3755.

M. Newman. Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. II. Shortest paths, weighted networks, and centrality. Physical

Review E, 64(1):7, 2001b. ISSN 1063-651X. .

M. Newman. The structure of scientiﬁc collaboration networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

98(2):404–409, January 2001c. ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490. . URL https://www.pnas.org/content/98/2/404.

A. L. Barab´asi, H. Jeong, Z. N´eda, E. Ravasz, A. Schubert, and T. Vicsek. Evolution of the social network of

scientiﬁc collaborations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 311(3-4):590–614, 2002. ISSN

0378-4371. .

Choong Fatt, Ephrance Ujum, and Kuru Ratnavelu. The structure of collaboration in the Journal of Finance.

Scientometrics, 85(3):849–860, 2010. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Pradeep Racherla and Clark Hu. A social network perspective of tourism research collaborations. Annals of Tourism

Research, 37(4):1012–1034, 2010. ISSN 0160-7383. .

Qiang Ye, Haiyan Song, and Tong Li. Cross-institutional collaboration networks in tourism and hospitality research.

Tourism Management Perspectives, 2-3:55–64, 2012. ISSN 2211-9736. .

Jos´e Ant´onio C. Santos and Margarida Cust´odio Santos. Co-authorship networks: Collaborative research structures

at the journal level. Tourism & Management Studies, 12(1):05–13, 2016. ISSN 2182-8466. . URL http:

//www.scielo.mec.pt/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S2182-84582016000100001&lng=en&tlng=en.

K.-I. Goh, E. Oh, B. Kahng, and D. Kim. Betweenness centrality correlation in social networks. Physical review. E,

Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics, 67(1 Pt 2):017101, 2003. ISSN 1539-3755. .

Kwang-Il Goh, Eulsik Oh, Hawoong Jeong, Byungnam Kahng, and Doochul Kim. Classiﬁcation of scale-free

networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99(20):

12583–12588, 2002. ISSN 0027-8424. . URL http://www.pnas.org/content/99/20/12583.abstract.

Erjia Yan and Ying Ding. Applying centrality measures to impact analysis: A coauthorship network analysis. Journal

of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 60(10):2107–2118, October 2009. ISSN

15322882. . URL http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bth&AN=44295774&site=

ehost-live&authtype=ip,uid.

Haiyan Hou, Hildrun Kretschmer, and Zeyuan Liu. The structure of scientiﬁc collaboration networks in

Scientometrics. Scientometrics, 75(2):189–202, 2008. ISSN 0138-9130. .

Marko A. Rodriguez and Alberto Pepe. On the relationship between the structural and socioacademic communities

of a coauthorship network. Journal of Informetrics, 2(3):195–201, 2008. ISSN 1751-1577. .

Caroline S. Wagner and Loet Leydesdorﬀ. Network structure, self-organization, and the growth of international

collaboration in science. Research Policy, 34(10):1608–1618, December 2005b. ISSN 0048-7333. . URL

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048733305001745.

Leonardo Costa Ribeiro, M´arcia Siqueira Rapini, Leandro Alves Silva, and Eduardo Motta Albuquerque. Growth

patterns of the network of international collaboration in science. Scientometrics, 114(1):159–179, January 2018.

ISSN 1588-2861. . URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2573-x.

Loet Leydesdorﬀ, Caroline Wagner, Han Woo Park, and Jonathan Adams. International Collaboration in Science:

The Global Map and the Network. arXiv:1301.0801 [cs], January 2013. URL

http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.0801. arXiv: 1301.0801.

Omar A. Doria Arrieta, Fabio Pammolli, and Alexander M. Petersen. Quantifying the negative impact of brain drain

on the integration of European science. Science Advances, 3(4):e1602232, 2017. ISSN 2375-2548. .

Zaida Chinchilla-Rodr´ıguez, Maria Benavent-P´erez, F´elix de Moya-Aneg´on, and Sandra Miguel. International

collaboration in Medical Research in Latin America and the Caribbean (2003-2007). Journal of the American

Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(11):2223–2238, 2012. ISSN 1532-2882. .



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 23 of 27

Aldo Geuna. Global Mobility of Research Scientists: The Economics of Who Goes Where and Why. Academic Press,

August 2015. ISBN 978-0-12-801681-7. Google-Books-ID: l7rjAwAAQBAJ.

Thomas Scherngell, editor. The Geography of Networks and R&D Collaborations. Advances in Spatial Science.

Springer International Publishing, 2013. ISBN 978-3-319-02698-5. . URL

https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319026985.

Michael Gusenbauer. Google Scholar to overshadow them all? Comparing the sizes of 12 academic search engines

and bibliographic databases. Scientometrics, 118(1):177–214, January 2019. ISSN 1588-2861. . URL

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2958-5.

Anne-Wil Harzing and Satu Alakangas. Google Scholar, Scopus and the Web of Science: a longitudinal and

cross-disciplinary comparison. Scientometrics, 106(2):787–804, February 2016. ISSN 1588-2861. . URL

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1798-9.

Michael Gusenbauer and Neal R. Haddaway. Which academic search systems are suitable for systematic reviews or

meta-analyses? Evaluating retrieval qualities of Google Scholar, PubMed, and 26 other resources. Research

Synthesis Methods, n/a(n/a), 2019. ISSN 1759-2887. . URL

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jrsm.1378.

Elsevier. Scopus | The largest database of peer-reviewed literature | Elsevier, 2020. URL

https://www.elsevier.com/en-gb/solutions/scopus.

John Mingers and Martin Meyer. Normalizing Google Scholar data for use in research evaluation. Scientometrics,

112(2):1111–1121, August 2017. ISSN 1588-2861. . URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2415-x.

Dag W. Aksnes and Gunnar Sivertsen. A Criteria-based Assessment of the Coverage of Scopus and Web of Science.

Journal of Data and Information Science, 4(1):1–21, February 2019. . URL https://content.sciendo.com/

configurable/contentpage/journals$002fjdis$002f4$002f1$002farticle-p1.xml.

Karen Bennett. English as a Lingua Franca in Academia. The Interpreter and Translator Trainer, 7(2):169–193,

September 2013. ISSN 1750-399X. . URL https://doi.org/10.1080/13556509.2013.10798850. Publisher:

Routledge eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/13556509.2013.10798850.

Sheila Trahar, Adisorn Juntrasook, James Burford, Astrid von Kotze, and Danny Wildemeersch. Hovering on the

periphery? Decolonising writing for academic journals. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International

Education, 49(1):149–167, January 2019. ISSN 0305-7925. . URL

https://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2018.1545817. Publisher: Routledge eprint:

https://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2018.1545817.

Floriana Gargiulo, Auguste Caen, Renaud Lambiotte, and Timoteo Carletti. The classical origin of modern

mathematics. EPJ Data Science, 5(1):26, 2016.

Nikolai Smirnov and N. V. Smirnov. On the estimation of the discrepancy between empirical curves of distribution

for two independent samples. Bull. Math. Univ. Moscou, 1939.

Daniel M¨ullner. Modern hierarchical, agglomerative clustering algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1109.2378, 2011.

T. S. Evans, Renaud Lambiotte, and Pietro Panzarasa. Community structure and patterns of scientiﬁc collaboration

in business and management. Scientometrics, 89(1):381–396, 2011.

Uma Kumar, Vinod Kumar, and J. N. Kapur. Normalized measures of entropy. International Journal Of General

System, 12(1):55–69, 1986.

Frank Neﬀke and Martin Henning. Skill relatedness and ﬁrm diversiﬁcation. Strategic Management Journal, 34(3):

297–316, 2013.

Bela Balassa. Trade liberalisation and “revealed” comparative advantage1. The Manchester School, 33(2):99–123,

1965.

Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. Finding and evaluating community structure in networks. Physical review E,

69(2):026113, 2004.

Muhammad Aqib Javed, Muhammad Shahzad Younis, Siddique Latif, Junaid Qadir, and Adeel Baig. Community

detection in networks: A multidisciplinary review. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 108:87–111,

2018.

J-C Delvenne, Sophia N Yaliraki, and Mauricio Barahona. Stability of graph communities across time scales.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(29):12755–12760, 2010.

Renaud Lambiotte, J-C Delvenne, and Mauricio Barahona. Laplacian dynamics and multiscale modular structure in

networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:0812.1770, 2008.

Renaud Lambiotte, Roberta Sinatra, J-C Delvenne, Tim S Evans, Mauricio Barahona, and Vito Latora. Flow

graphs: Interweaving dynamics and structure. Physical Review E, 84(1):017102, 2011.

J¨org Reichardt and Stefan Bornholdt. Statistical mechanics of community detection. Physical review E, 74(1):

016110, 2006.

Santo Fortunato and Marc Barthelemy. Resolution limit in community detection. Proceedings of the national

academy of sciences, 104(1):36–41, 2007.

Vincent D. Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefebvre. Fast unfolding of communities

in large networks. Journal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 2008(10):P10008, 2008.

Vincent A. Traag, Ludo Waltman, and Nees Jan van Eck. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected

communities. Scientiﬁc reports, 9(1):1–12, 2019.

Anna-Kaisa Pietil¨anen and Christophe Diot. Dissemination in opportunistic social networks: the role of temporal

communities. In Proceedings of the thirteenth ACM international symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and

Computing, pages 165–174, 2012.

Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. Data mining: practical machine learning tools and techniques with Java

implementations. Acm Sigmod Record, 31(1):76–77, 2002.

Javier G´omez Prieto, Albane Demblans, and Manuel Palazuelos Mart´ınez. Smart Specialisation in the world, an EU

policy approach helping to discover innovation globally. Technical report,

Publications Oﬃce of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2019. URL https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/-/

smart-specialisation-in-the-world-an-eu-policy-approach-helping-to-discover-innovation-globally?

inheritRedirect=true.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 24 of 27

Jean-Charles Delvenne, Michael T. Schaub, Sophia N. Yaliraki, and Mauricio Barahona. The stability of a graph

partition: A dynamics-based framework for community detection. In Dynamics On and Of Complex Networks,

Volume 2, pages 221–242. Springer, 2013.

Thomas M Cover and Joy A Thomas. Information theory and statistics. Elements of Information Theory, 1(1):

279–335, 1991.

Hinrich Sch¨utze, Christopher D Manning, and Prabhakar Raghavan. Introduction to information retrieval,

volume 39. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 2008.



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 25 of 27

Figure 6: In this ﬁgure, we display the average proportion of within-region

strength (as a share of total strength) for each continent. We observe that

Africa and Asia have greatly increased their focus on within-region collab-

oration since 1970, while countries in America have on average broadened

their collaboration proﬁles.


## Appendix A: Data processing


As our data covers over ﬁve decades, our analysis spans such geopolitical changes as the reuniﬁcation of East

Germany and West Germany in 1990, the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the breakup of Yugoslavia from 1991

to 1992 and the dissolution of Czechoslovakia to the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993 as well as smaller

transitions such as post-colonial transitions during the 1970s and early 1980s, the independence of Bangladesh from

Pakistan in 1971, Palestinian declaration of independence in 1988, the independence of Namibia from South Africa

in 1990, uniﬁcation of North and South Yemen in 1990, and the independence of Eritrea from Ethiopia in 1993,

East-Timor from Indonesia in 1999, and South Sudan from Sudan in 2011. Since we are interested in observing

international collaboration across the network of countries over time, some of our methods require the network to

remain relatively consistent over time and in order to achieve this, we adjust for the larger geopolitical transitions by

keeping the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Germany, and Czechoslovakia as single nodes throughout the analysis. We

consider this operationalisation justiﬁed by the fact that beyond fulﬁlling our methodological requirements, the

relationship of these larger regions to the rest of the global academia follows rather constant trends (beyond initial

disruptions following the political changes), which gives us conﬁdence that the academic institutions continue

working in a relatively similar fashion before and after the changes.


## Appendix B: Within region strength


We may deﬁne the total collaboration strength within (resp. outside) the region for each country by

j∈Ju

n(t)

i,j,

dC

out(i, t) =

X

j∈Jo

n(t)

i,j,

(B.1)

dC

in(i, t) =

X

then as previously performed with entropy deﬁne the proportion of total strength within the region by

dC

prop(i, t) =

dC

in(i, t)

dC

in(i, t) + dC

out(i, t) .

(B.2)

Now taking the average of this measure over each continent, we display results in Figure 6. We see a similar picture

to those for our entropy measure, where Africa and Asia in particular have greatly increased their focus on

within-region collaboration.


## Appendix C: Transformation of collaboration counts for visualisation in Figure 4


For better highlighting signiﬁcant partnerships when visualising the international collaboration network in Figure 4,

we apply a transformation to the raw counts of collaborations. Speciﬁcally, the collaboration signiﬁcance may be



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 26 of 27

deﬁned as

k̸=i n(t)

i,k

P

s(t)

i,j =

n(t)

i,j/ P

m,n n(t)

m,n

.

(C.1)

ℓ̸=j n(t)

ℓ,j/ P

This corresponds to the ratio of the actual number of collaborations between country pairs to those expected under

a conﬁguration model (see e.g. Newman and Girvan [2004])—values larger than one correspond to more

collaborations occurring than expected at random. As this measure is highly skewed, we re-scale it so that values lie

between −1 and 1:

ˆp(t)

i,j =

s(t)

i,j −1

s(t)

i,j + 1

.

(C.2)

We then ﬁnally set ˆp(t)

i,j = 0 if ˆp(t)

i,j < 0, i.e., those pairs for which fewer collaborations occurred than would be

expected, and visualise the resulting network in Figure 4.


## Appendix D: Using stability in community detection


The key step is the relation of modularity to the stability of communities under Laplacian dynamics Lambiotte et al.

[2008], as deﬁned by the formula

˙pi =

X

j

Lijpj.

(D.1)

Here the appropriate matrix L to relate to modularity depends on the type of network under consideration. As our

network is undirected, we may use the normalised Laplacian matrix

Lij = Aij

kj

−δij,

(D.2)

and the stability of the partition is then deﬁned to be Lambiotte et al. [2008]

h

(eτL)ijp∗

j −p∗

i p∗

j

i

δ(gi, gj),

(D.3)

R(τ) =

X

i,j

where p∗

i = ki/2m is the stationary solution to (D.1). Expanding the exponential matrix to ﬁrst order in τ,

(eτL)ij = δij + τLij + O(τ 2),

(D.4)

thus naturally leads to the inclusion of a resolution parameter γ = 1/τ in the modularity equation, as ignoring the

constant term and dividing by τ we then have

Rlin(τ) =

1

2m



Aij −γ kikj



δ(gi, gj),

(D.5)

X

2m

i,j

an answer to the resolution problem previously mentioned.

In matrix form, equation (D.5) may be written as Delvenne et al. [2013]

Rlin(τ) = Tr



H⊤

 A

2m −γπ⊤π



H



,

(D.6)

where H is the N × c matrix with Hij = 1 if country i is in community j and zero else, and Tr corresponds to the

trace operator. For a given Markov time τ (or equivalently resolution parameter γ), we seek the partition that

maximises this function. As this optimisation problem is NP-hard, as stated in the main text, we use a greedy


## method from Traag et al. [2019].


Suitable resolution parameter ranges are typically discovered through calculation of the variation of information. For

two partitions X and Y of a set A into disjoint subsets, X = {X1, X2, . . . , Xk} and Y = {Y1, Y2, .., , Yl}, this

measure is deﬁned as follows. Let n = P

i |Xi| = P

j |Yj| = |A|, pi = |Xi|/n, qj = |Yj|/n,

rij = |Xi ∩Yj|/n. Then the normalised variation of information between the two partitions is:

VI(X, Y ) = −

1

log N

X

i,j

rij [log(rij/pi) + log(rij/qj)] .

(D.7)



Fitzgerald et al.

Page 27 of 27

Figure 7: Average KL divergence (as deﬁned in equation (E.1)) for each

continent between the observed collaboration counts and those expected by

the conﬁguration model. Over time, the conﬁguration model has become a

better description for Europe, while other continents have further diﬀered.

As there is some stochasticity in the output of the optimisation process, we run the method many times for each

resolution, and collect the resulting partitions. If the average variation of information between each pair of such

partitions is small, then this suggests that this parameter choice provides somewhat more robust communities.


## Appendix E: How good a null model is the conﬁguration model?


As suggested in the main text, the grouping of major producers – speciﬁcally the USA and China – together in a

single community in recent years, despite not necessarily having similar partners other than each other, may imply

that the conﬁguration null model used is not the optimal choice of null model for uncovering signiﬁcant

partnerships. To further investigate this, we may study how closely the observed distribution of collaborations for

each country lies to that predicted by the conﬁguration model. One way of assessing the proximity of two such

probability distributions is the Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence (see e.g. Cover and Thomas [1991]). For two

discrete probability distributions P and Q that have the same support, χ say, to ﬁnd the information gain from

using P (which can be the real observed data) in place of our model, Q, we calculate

x∈χ

P (x) log

 P (x)



.

(E.1)

DKL(P ∥Q) =

X

Q(x)

In our situation, for country i in year t, we compare the empirical distribution of collaborations with all other

countries, i.e. P (t)

i

(j) = p(t)

ij = n(t)

ij / P

k n(t)

ik , to that predicted by the conﬁguration null model, where the

expected number of links between countries i and j is k(t)

i

k(t)

j

/2m(t) (followed by analogous normalisation for

each country to form a probability distribution). To ensure the support of the empirical distribution and the

conﬁguration model match, we perform additive smoothing (see e.g. Sch¨utze et al. [2008]), i.e. we add one to the

count of collaborations between each pair of countries prior to normalising.

In Figure 7 we display the average of the resulting KL divergence for each continent across time. We observe that

while in 1970 the conﬁguration model was a comparably good choice for all continents, there has since been a large

deviation. Europe has on average increasingly collaborated as the model would predict, suggesting that preferential

attachment is a major mechanism driving international collaborations at the aggregate level, while other continents

– particularly Africa – have collaborated in more and more ‘surprising’ patterns relative to the model. This

decreasingly suitable description of some regions true collaboration implies that an alternative could be used to

further highlight groups of closely partnered countries, though in doing so note we would lose the dynamical

interpretation of communities, and the associated stability function. We leave the development of a suitable

alternative model to future work.