Applied Intelligence manuscript No.

(will be inserted by the editor)


## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly


Acquired Valid Observations

Salma Chaieb · Brahim Hnich · Ali Ben

Mrad

Received: date / Accepted: date

arXiv:2101.07067v3  [cs.AI]  4 May 2022


## Abstract The information describing the conditions of a system or a person


is constantly evolving and may become obsolete and contradict other infor-

mation. A database, therefore, must be consistently updated upon the acqui-

sition of new valid observations that contradict obsolete ones contained in the


## database. In this paper, we propose a novel causation-based system for dealing


with the information obsolescence problem when a causal Bayesian network is

our representation model. Our approach is based on studying causal depen-

dencies between the network variables to detect, in real-time, contradictions

between the observations on a single subject and then identify the obsolete

ones. We propose a new approximate concept, ǫ-Contradiction, which repre-

sents the conﬁdence level of having a contradiction between some observations

relating to a speciﬁc subject. Once identiﬁed, obsolete observations are given

in an original way, in the form of an explanation AND-OR Tree. Our approach

can be applied in various domains where the main issue is to detect and explain

personalized situations such that the reasons and circumstances underlying

unexpected outcomes. Examples include among others: detecting behaviour

change by analyzing user proﬁles, and identifying the causes of some anoma-

lies such as bank frauds by analyzing customer interactions. In this paper,

we demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach in a real-life medical appli-

cation: the elderly fall-prevention and showcase how the resulted explanation

S. Chaieb

University of Sousse, ISITCom, 4011, Sousse, Tunisia

University of Sfax, CES Lab, 3038, Sfax, Tunisia

Tel.: +216 53 950 523

E-mail: salma.chaieb2@yahoo.com

B. Hnich

University of Monastir, FSM, 5000, Monastir, Tunisia

University of Sfax, CES Lab, 3038, Sfax, Tunisia

A. Ben Mrad

University of Sfax, ISAAS, 1013, Sfax, Tunisia

University of Sfax, CES Lab, 3038, Sfax, Tunisia



2

Salma Chaieb et al.

AND-OR trees can be used to give reliable recommendations to physicians

and assist decision-makers. Our approach runs in a polynomial time and gives

systematically and substantially good results.

Keywords Obsolete information · Contradictory observations · Causal

Bayesian network · Information update · Elderly-fall prevention · Decision

support

1 Introduction

New Information Technology and Communications, such as E−health and E-

commerce, expert systems, intelligent agents, are spreading throughout the

world. To provide the required services, most of these real-world systems rely

on a massive amount of data. Information is commonly obtained from a variety

of sources and is frequently uncertain and unreliable. Information uncertainty

stems from, but is not limited to, three reasons: (1) imprecision (unreliable

acquisition sources); (2) obsolescence (out-of-date information); and (3) in-

completeness (limited or missing information). This study focuses on the un-

certainties surrounding information obsolescence.

Information obsolescence may be caused by, but not restricted to, informa-

tion aging or by the acquisition of a new observation on a speciﬁc subject that

contradicts what we currently know about this subject, given a representation

model, or both. For instance, a person’s age-related decline in vision is an

example of information aging, which results in obsolete information about a

person’s vision. An example of obsolescence due to the occurrence of a contra-

diction between observations is as follows: Consider a person who is in good

health and drives her car regularly. Now, you learn that she has a serious dis-

ease that causes the loss of eyesight (new information). Since a blind person

cannot drive a car (general knowledge), the new piece of information prompts

us to update the older one (she drives her car regularly) since it clearly became

obsolete after the arrival of the new observation.

In this paper, we focus on information obsolescence related to the contra-

diction between newly acquired observations and existing ones given a repre-

sentation model. We address the new challenge that concerns the design of an

Obsolete Information Recommendation System (OIRS). Our OIRS’ goal is to

continuously track and monitor observations, detect contradictions between

observations, and recommend all the observations that may become obsolete

and require updating.

Our approach is primarily based on studying causal dependencies between

the given observations in order to gain a better understanding, comprehension,

and insight into the occurrence of some events, namely the contradiction. In-

deed, it explains the causes of the occurrence of a contradiction between given

observations (why do we have a contradiction?), as well as the diﬀerent al-

ternatives to remove this contradiction (what are the possible observations

responsible for contradiction? What if we update the values of some observa-

tions?). Furthermore, it is intended to be applied in an uncertain environment




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


3

characterized by a lack of information as we may not have observations on all

the characteristics of a given subject. For these diﬀerent reasons, we choose to

use a Causal Bayesian network (CBN) to represent our knowledge. The overall

architecture of our OIRS is shown in Fig. 1. We will use a running example of

a consistent set of information related to an elderly person to illustrate how it

works:

Fig. 1 Obsolete Information Recommendation System

Example 1 Mrs. Wilson has a good walking ability, drives her car, and goes

shopping regularly. Her house is equipped with a sensor network that detects

her movements and these sensors are in good operating condition.

This is the old information that we know, acquired from information

providers, and stored in the elderly database row reserved for Mrs. Wilson.

By inference (using a CBN approved by experts), she regularly leaves her

home. In step 1, new observations are recorded. For our elderly person, new

information, that is supposed to be certain, is given by a sensor indicates that:

Mrs. Wilson did not leave her home during the last 15 days. In step 2, us-

ing a CBN model and based on a given threshold ǫ, contradictions between

the newly arriving observations and the existing ones are detected. For our

elderly person, the new observation raises a contradiction since it is no longer

consistent with the older ones given the CBN. Next, in step 3, we identify pos-

sible obsolete information. In our running example, our system detects that

either Mrs. Wilson did not leave home, or sensor network has broken down.

Finally, in step 4, we provide recommendations for experts on how to update



4

Salma Chaieb et al.

obsolete observations. So in our example, we recommend the responsible for

monitoring to start by checking the sensor’s state. After checking the sensor’s

state, a new observation stating that the sensor network works well arrives,

and we start a new cycle. This second new piece of information (captured in

step 1) aﬃrms contradiction (in step 2). Our Information Update System at

step 3, thus, should deduce that Mrs. Wilson’s behavior has changed as she

has not actually left home during the last 15 days. So, she did not drive and

shop as she used to. Then, the information she drives her car and she does

shopping regularly have become obsolete to the new observation and must be

updated. Our system recommends, at step 4, the removal of obsolete informa-

tion from the database row reserved for Mrs. Wilson with a certain priority.

In order to assist decision-makers (i.e., information receivers), we assume that

older information is more likely to be obsolete, furthermore, we recommend

the most probable substitute values that can replace the obsolete ones. Our

system can, therefore, supply one of the specialist doctors of the elderly with

additional information, helping to better understand her health status. Fi-

nally, our recommendations are associated with a conﬁdence level in order to

manage uncertainty.

The main focus of this paper is on steps 2 and 3 of the OIRS, i.e., the

Obsolete Information Detection System (OIDS). In this work, we assume that

recently acquired information is reliable and consistent with each other. In-

deed, a piece of information, already stored in the database, may turn out to

be obsolete because of the occurrence of a new event, considered as certain,

that contradicts it, given the CBN. We delegate the construction of the CBN

to a separate module given by the green zone above the OIRS in Fig. 1.

Though closely related to belief revision theory [1], we do not update the

knowledge base (CBN) but only update personal information about a sin-

gle subject. Other works, such as [12], propose a method to understand the

abnormal trajectories of a pedestrian by using a sparse representation-based

classiﬁcation model. entails analyzing a pedestrian’s path and determining

whether or not it is normal behavior based on training samples. Despite the

fact that our method is based on the detection of abnormal behavior, it is not

a straightforward problem. Rather, it entails identifying the obsolete informa-

tion that is responsible for the anomalies and updating it in order to restore

the personal database’s consistency. To the best of our knowledge, our work

tackles a novel problem that has not yet been addressed in the literature. In

this paper, we demonstrate the applicability of the proposed approach in the

context of a European elderly fall-prevention project.

This paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2, we describe formal back-

ground and notation. Sect. 3 is an overview of related works. In Sect. 4,

we propose a new concept regarding ǫ-Contradiction among observations and

study its theoretical properties. In Sect. 5, we give and discuss the obsolete

information detection algorithm and its complexity. In Sect. 6, we show how

to calculate the optimal threshold beyond which contradictions are detectable.

In Sect. 7, we present our empirical study on a real-life application example:




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


5

the elderly fall-prevention context. Finally, we conclude in Sect. 8 and outline

our future research directions.

2 Formal background

Unless otherwise noted, throughout this paper, we denote elderly database

attributes with uppercase letters such as X1, X2, X3. The domain of an at-

tribute Xi is denoted with D(Xi). Speciﬁc values, also called observations,

taken by those attributes are denoted with lowercase letters x1,1, x2,1, x3,2

with xi,j ∈D(Xi), j ∈{1, ..., #D(Xi)}. In this paper, we are only concerned

with ﬁnite domains.

In this work, we choose to use a causal Bayesian network [32, 41, 45] to

represent our knowledge. Several facts justify this choice: ﬁrst, we work within

an uncertain environment characterized by a lack of information, as we may

not have observations on all the characteristics of an elderly person. CBNs

are thus a powerful probabilistic model that allows reasoning with incomplete


## data. Second, our approach is primarily based on studying dependencies and


causal relationships between the given observations to provide us with an un-

derstanding, comprehension, and insight into the occurrence of some events.

It can also be used to formalize, measure, and deal with diﬀerent unfairness

(contradictory) scenarios underlying a dataset. Indeed, it explains how and

why an attribute inﬂuences other variables in a dataset, the causes of the

occurrence of a contradiction between given observations (why do we have a

contradiction?), as well as the diﬀerent alternatives to remove this contradic-

tion (what are the possible observations responsible for contradiction? What

if we update the values of some observations?). So, CBN represents a ﬂexi-

ble useful tool in this respect, as it can be used to formalize, measure, and

deal with diﬀerent unfairness (contradictory) scenarios underlying a dataset.

Third, in real life, the newly acquired information may be uncertain, contrary

to what we have supposed. So CBN proves to be very relevant for manag-

ing such a type of information through likelihood evidence [42] and ﬁxed and

non-ﬁxed probabilistic observations [5,38]. Fourth, once obsolete observations

are detected, our system can recommend values that can replace the obsolete

ones to help the user make the right decision. This recommendation can be

carried out using an intervention-based strategy that recommends the possi-

ble interventions on how to substitute the obsolete values. A highly accurate

prediction model alone is not able to provide guidance when reasoning what

might happen if we take an action, that is, intervene by changing the values

of some variables supposed to be obsolete. Consequently, CBN proves to be

very relevant to predict the result of external interventions on a variable via

causal inference [43].

A CBN (also known as a Markovian model) provides a general modeling

framework for representing complex causal networks and can be used to model

diﬀerent causal queries, including inferences about observations and interven-

tions. A CBN is a Bayesian network (BN) [15,23,41] where the parents of each



6

Salma Chaieb et al.

vertex are its direct causes. The direct causes of Xi are the variables that will

change the distribution of Xi as we vary them, as we perfectly intervene in the

entire system. A perfect intervention on some Xi is an independent cause of Xi

that sets it to a particular value, all other things remain equal. Operationally,

this just wipes out all edges into Xi and make it a constant. All other things

remain equal.

As with the Bayesian network (BN), each CBN is associated with a pair

(G, Θ), where G = (X, E) is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) with nodes

X = {X1, ..., Xn} corresponding to the database attributes, and directed edges

(also called arcs) E that connect these nodes and denoting causal inﬂuence.

Indeed, given two variables X1 and X2, we say that X1 precedes X2 causally

if experimental interventions that change the value of X1 can aﬀect the distri-

bution of X2 but not vice versa. The second component of the pair, namely Θ,

represents a set of parameters that quantiﬁes the network and is stored as a

set of conditional probability tables (CPT) for each node. A CBN over the set

of attributes X uniquely deﬁnes a joint probability distribution given by the

chain rule 1. It is deﬁned by the product of the local probability distributions

on each variable Xi, P(Xi | Pa(Xi)), where Pa(Xi) denotes the set of the

parents of the node Xi in G. So, Xj is parent of Xi if there is a directed link

from Xj to Xi (i.e., (Xj, Xi) ∈E). Xi is then called child of Xj.

n

Y

P(X) =

i=1

P(Xi | Pa(Xi))

(1)

We say that variables Xi and Xj are conditionally independent given a set

of variables Y ⊂X, if P(Xi|Xj, Y) = P(Xi|Y).

In this work, we consider the CBN as a stable component and its construc-

tion and updating is not part of the aim of this paper. The CBN is passed as

a parameter to our detection module. It is used only to represent causal de-

pendencies between observations and to compute the conditional probability

of one node, given values assigned to the other attributes.

In order to restrict the obsolete observations search set, we will later use

the idea of a Markov boundary of a node Xi in a BN and the concept of active

path that creates dependencies between nodes. These concepts also remain

valid when we approach CBN.

The Markov boundary [41] of a node Xi is a subset of nodes that ”prevents”

Xi from being aﬀected by any node outside the boundary. One of Xi’s Markov

boundaries is its Markov blanket.

The Markov blanket, MB(Xi), of a node Xi is unique and comprises Xi’s

parents (direct causes), Xi’s children (direct eﬀects), and Xi’s spouses (i.e.,

other parents of the node’s children) in the CBN. So with complete informa-

tion, when computing the conditional probability of a node Xi, MB(Xi) forms

a natural feature selection, as all features outside the Markov blanket can be

safely deleted from the CBN. This can often produce a much smaller CBN

without compromising the computing accuracy.




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


7

The active path is deﬁned based on the concept of d-separation in CBNs

[41, 44]. Indeed, given two variables X1 and Xk from the CBN, a path X1 −

X2 −... −Xk from X1 to Xk is active if for each consecutive triplet in this

path one of the following conditions is true:

- Xi−1 →Xi →Xi+1, and Xi is not observed,

- Xi−1 ←Xi ←Xi+1, and Xi is not observed,

- Xi−1 ←Xi →Xi+1, and Xi is not observed,

- Xi−1 →Xi ←Xi+1, and Xi is observed or one of its descendants.

We denote by N the number of CBN’s variables and by E the number of

CBN’s edges. Sets are denoted by boldface capital letters. We deﬁne some sets

and functions, which we will use extensively throughout this paper:

– OBS = {(Xi, xi,j), i ∈I, I ⊆[1, N], xi,j ∈D(Xi), j ∈{1, .., #D(Xi)}} the

set of pairs representing a variable and its observed value, relating to a

single individual of the database.

– Parents(Xi) : Xi 7→{(Xj, xj,k), (Xj, Xi) ∈E, k ∈{1, .., #D(Xj)}}, a func-

tion that returns the set of Xi ’parents and their associated observations.

– Children(Xi) : Xi 7→{(Xj, xj,k), (Xi, Xj) ∈E, k ∈{1, .., #D(Xj)}}, a

function that returns the set of Xi ’children and their associated observa-

tions.

– Spouses(Xi) : Xi 7→{(Xj, xj,k), Children(Xi) ∩Children(Xj) ̸= ∅, k ∈

{1, .., #D(Xj)}}, a function that returns the set of Xi ’spouses and their

associated observations if they exist.

Let onew denote the newly observed value of a variable Onew ∈X such that

(Onew, onew) was not in OBS at the previous iteration. When there was a pre-

vious observation on Onew, the new one replaces it, meaning that (Onew, onew)

replaces the previous element related to Onew in OBS. When no previous ob-

servation on the variable Onew was present in OBS, the element (Onew, onew)

is added to the set OBS. Thus, we deﬁne the set OBS’ as follows:

– OBS’ = OBS \ {(Onew, onew)}.

In order to simplify, we assume that OBS is initially consistent, i.e. it

does not contain contradictory observations until the acquisition of onew —

or OBS’ is consistent. We assume also that newly acquired observations are

reliable and consistent with each other.

Table 1 provides a description of the parameters and notation used through-

out this paper.

3 Related works

The term obsolescence was introduced in 1820-1830, but became widely known

to people in 1932 in the United States thanks to the book by Bernard Lon-

don [31]. The interpretation of the obsolescence of an object remains vague

and varied and can be deﬁned by the fact of becoming obsolete, out of date,



8

Salma Chaieb et al.

Notation

Description

Onew

newly observed variable of the CBN

onew

newly observed value on the variable Onew

OBS

set of all observed variables and its observed values relating to a

single individual of the database

OBS’

set of all observed variables and its observed values relating to a

single individual of the database, deprived of (Onew, onew)

G

Directed acyclic graph

θ

set of parameters that quantiﬁes the CBN

X

set of variables of the CBN

E

set of directed edges that connect X in the CBN

N

the number of variables in the CBN

E

the number of directed edges in the CBN

P a(Xi)

set of parents of a variable Xi in the CBN

ǫ

threshold that represents the conﬁdence level of having a contra-

diction between some observations, 0 ≤ǫ ≤1

Sonew

set of all obsolete observations, Sonew ⊆OBS’

Nd

the size of the set Sonew

MB(Xi)

Markov Blanket of a variable Xi

Si

subset of Sonew that contains dependent variables and their ob-

served values

SAND

i

set containing each observation in Si that is individually ǫ-

Contradictory to onew, given the CBN

SOR

i

set containing each observation of Si that is not individually ǫ-

Contradictory to onew, given the CBN

Ns

the number of observations in Si

T

Explanation AND-OR Tree

B

a CBN

Ns

the number of observations in Si

S

a test set of contradictory and non contradictory scenarios labeled

by experts

Ci

a scenario example represented by the pair of newly acquired in-

formation accompanied by a sequence of pairs of some previously

acquired observations

ci

label attributed to Ci by experts, ci = 1 if Ci is declared contra-

dictory by the experts, ci = 0 otherwise

Table 1 Summary of notation

outdated, invalid, etc. A bibliographic search shows that, to the best of our

knowledge, there are no works that tackle information obsolescence as deﬁned

in our work. Nevertheless, there are some related works in the information

revision ﬁeld in general. We can broadly classify the existing approaches into

two major categories: those which address the problem of the knowledge-base

revision, and those which concern the updating of an information base.

The ﬁrst category falls within the theory of belief revision [1,17,24]. This

area has been treated from several points of view: symbolic versus numerical as

well as logical versus probabilistic. Since the logical environment does not take




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


9

into account explicit measures of uncertainty, some other revision approaches

have used the frameworks of both possibility and probability theories. [2,16,22].

The Bayesian belief revision [7,51] is a particular type of probabilistic belief

revision, in which a belief about the target variable of the graph is represented

by its conditional probability given the evidence that has been observed. In

the Bayesian context, as with belief change in general, the two processes re-

vision and update have to be distinguished: ﬁrst, belief updating (also called

probabilistic inference) consists of calculating P(X|Y), the posterior proba-

bilities of target nodes X, given some observed values of evidence nodes Y.

Second, belief revision, also called Bayesian belief revision, aims to change the

initial probability distribution P on variables X of the CBN in the bases of

a local distribution R(X), X ∈X. The same methods used in probabilistic

belief revision apply to Bayesian belief revision.

Although our approach ﬁts into the information revision context, it does

not address the same problem as deﬁned above in belief revision theory. In-

deed, all the revision methods mentioned above are intended to revise the

knowledge by changing the representation model in response to changes in the

domain. However, in our work, we are not talking about knowledge revision.

The knowledge is supposed to be stable. It is represented by a CBN that de-

scribes some characteristics of a given subject, i.e., we assume that, during an

agreed period, the network structure for the graphical model and the CPTs are

an accurate representation of the knowledge about the domain and therefore

it does not change. The primary object of our work is, therefore, to update

a database that contains information as observations on CBN variables upon

the acquisition of new observations that contradict them, without changing

the CBN.

The second category includes methods of managing the information base

obsolescence. The existing approaches can be broadly categorized into two

types: information update based on its aging over time, and information up-

date based on tracing the output errors back to the input data.

The ﬁrst approach stems from studying the information age and its evolu-

tion. Information aging has acquired a speciﬁc interest in the domain of web

information. The spread of events and information in social networks and news

pages is a particular focus in this domain. For example, aging theory is ap-

plied to represent variations in the number of publications related to a topic

or event [11, 40]. In these work, decay functions are used to model temporal

decreases. Decay functions are also used in the domain of sensor data to man-

age the aggregation of data with diﬀerent ages [14]. Indeed, the older the data,

the less weight it has in the aggregated data summary.

In [26], authors describe a data-driven methodology for the automatic iden-

tiﬁcation of text segments in encyclopedic resources, which contain information

requiring updating named ”obsolescence segments”. They deﬁned an obsoles-

cence segment as a text that is likely to have changed between the time of

the publication of the article and the moment of its reading. It thus needs

to be updated. Wang et al. propose in [52] a partial coding of a sensor net-

work which solves the problem of removing obsolete information in coded data



10

Salma Chaieb et al.

segments to accommodate newly collected one. In that work, the information

obsolescence process is mainly based on the buﬀer size of the sensors and the

age of the information. In [9], the authors proposed speciﬁc functions ”expiry

functions” that attribute a conﬁdence degree to each observation, considering

some parameters: acquisition date, validity period, observation type, update

frequency, history, etc. In [53], authors resolve the problem of entity resolution

(also known as duplication detection, record linkage) on temporal data. Ac-

cording to them, certain attributes of records referring to the same real-world

entity in a database may change over time. All of these records may be valid

and proper for describing a certain entity only at a particular time period.

So they develop a rule-conducted uniform framework for resolving temporal

records by integrating data quality rules.

In industry, obsolescence of a component or a system is the fact that this

system is no longer useful, simply because of technical developments, the im-

possibility of maintenance, an unaﬀordable cost or that the product is no

longer available for purchase in its original form from the original manufacturer

or producer [37, 49]. In [48], authors propose a data mining based approach

to electronic part obsolescence forecasting. The proposed approach is based

on forecasting electronic part vendor-speciﬁc windows of obsolescence using

historical last-order or last-ship dates. In [20], authors propose a stochastic


## method for predicting the product life cycle in order to help companies improv-


ing obsolescence forecasting and reduce its impact in the supply chain. The

proposed method is based on the simulation of demand data using Markov

chain and homogeneous compound Poisson process. M. Mastrangelo et al.

propose in [34] a Weibull-based conditional probability method to predict mi-

croelectronic component obsolescence. In [21], authors propose an approach

to manage inventory obsolescence to improve retail performance. They design

an Obsolescence Mark Down stock model to quantify stock aging accurately

and appropriately. They argue that not all merchandise categories age at the

same rate in terms of loss of saleable value and therefore think of creating a

diﬀerent aging proﬁle for each category of merchandise.

In [47], the author design a framework with which an agent can deal with

uncertainty about its observations. This framework includes how to integrate

’expired’ and ’prevalent’ observations into the agent’s beliefs. In that work,

each observation has a meaningful period for which it can be thought of as

certainly true, and the author studies the veracity of information by attach-

ing an ’expiry date’ to each observation. In [19], authors study the age of

information in a general multi-source multi-hop wireless network with explicit

channel contention. An algorithm to generate near-optimal periodic status

update schedules based on sequential optimal ﬂooding is developed. In [54],

authors use the metric Age of Information, the time that has elapsed since

the last received update was generated, to measure the freshness of the status

information in a network.

These studies are close to ours, except that in these cases, information ob-

solescence is deﬁned regarding its aging over time rather than its inconsistency

with newly acquired information. So, an information acquired at time t may




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


11

no longer be reliable at time t+1, i.e., it can become obsolete. In these work,

authors use a time-stamped data acquired over a time interval. Thus, the goal

is to track the change of observations over time and identify those that have

become obsolete. However, in our work, the obsolescence of information is con-

ditioned, in addition to its age, by the arrival of a new event that is assumed

to be valid, which contradicts it and therefore renders it invalid.

The second approach falls within the theory of causality and explanation

in databases [25,29,30,36]. It consists of understanding the underlying causes

of a particular observation by determining the relative contribution of features

in machine-learning predictions [25], the responsibility of tuples to database

queries [4, 28], or the reliability of data sources [13]. In [30], a Shapley value

is used to quantify the extent to which the database violates a set of integrity

constraints. It consists of assigning to individual tuples a level of responsibility

to the overall inconsistency, and thereby prioritize tuples in the explanation

or inspection of dirt. In that work, the authors carried out a systematic in-

vestigation of the complexity of the Shapley value in common inconsistency

measures for functional-dependency violations. In [35], authors focus on de-

termining the causes of a set of unexpected results, possibly conditioned on

some prior knowledge of the correctness of another set of results.

In those works, the main idea is to observe some variables, make the infer-

ence, get the predicted values, and evaluate the resulted values based on some

prior knowledge of the correctness of another set of results. If errors are de-

tected, then try to ﬁnd among the observed variables those responsible for this

dire prediction. The problem here diﬀers from ours for many reasons. First,

we are not tackling a classiﬁcation/prediction problem. Our approach is a bit

complicated as obsolete observations are given in a particular form, an expla-

nation AND-OR tree, and therefore it can not be viewed as a simple classiﬁer

learning problem. Second, in functional dependencies-based works [30], sys-

tems detect errors in the output data, i.e., after the input data are integrated

and propagated, then trace the output errors back to the input data. In order

to check the correctness of the outputs, authors have access to several output

items that they know are correct. However, in our work, errors are detected

earlier, before the input data is transformed and integrated. Third, in those

works, the inputs are a set of Boolean/numerical variables, and the treatment

is based on propositional formulas and ﬁts into the logical environment, which

does not consider explicit measures of uncertainty. However, in real life, the

input data is often uncertain, and our method can perfectly ﬁt this constraint

through uncertain evidence in the CBN, as they represent a powerful model

for knowledge representation and reasoning under uncertainty. Moreover, in

Conditioned Causality-based work [35], the application can often detect such

errors from user feedback or based on the user’s subsequent actions and reac-

tions to the provided recommendations (target data). However, in our method,

the contradiction detection is fully automatic and does not require user inter-

vention. And last, but not least, in those works, the complexity of the proposed


## methods remains a worrying issue as it can introduce exponential blow-ups in


the size of the handled logical expression. However, in our work, we propose a



12

Salma Chaieb et al.

Update

information

when it

contradicts

other new

acquired one

(Our

approach)

Revise

Bayesian

belief in

presence of

new

information

[22,50]

Update

information

when detecting

output

errors [30,35]

Update

information

based on its

aging over

time [9,26,48]

Association

rules /

probability

distributions

/ expiry

functions

Bayes’ rule /

probability

distributions /

propositional

formula

Functional

dependency

constraints /

propositional

formula

Causal

Bayesian

network

Knowledge

representa-

tion

Observations

on the CBN

variables

Propositional

information

Propositional

information

Propositional

sentence

Information

representa-

tion

×

×

✓

✓

Check the in-

formation ag-

ing

✓

✓

×

✓

Detect incon-

sistencies

×

×

×

✓

Support

In-

complete

information

×

×

×

✓

Support

un-

certain infor-

mation

✓

×

×

×

Update

the

knowledge-

base

×

✓

✓

✓

Update

the

information

base

Set of source


## data


responsible for

bad prediction

AND-OR

explanation

tree of obsolete

information

New

probability

distributions

Expired

information

Output

Table 2 A comparative summary table that highlights the main diﬀerences between existing

work and our approach

quadratic-time approach to handle obsolescence. Table 2 highlights the main

diﬀerences between existing work and our approach.

4 Approximate contradiction

Recall that so far we assume that we have a consistent database, a CBN and

that a recently acquired information onew on a variable Onew related to a

speciﬁc subject is certain.




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


13

A contradiction occurs when the new observation onew added to the data-

base row relating to this subject, is no longer consistent with the rest of the

observations about this subject (denoted by OBS’), given the CBN model

that represents the dependencies among variables. Hence, theoretically, a con-

tradiction between observations occurs when the conditional probability of the

new observation given other observations is zero:

P(Onew = onew|OBS’) = 0

However, since the CBN is a probabilistic knowledge representation model,

there is always a degree of uncertainty related to the inference we draw from

it. Hence, in practice, we shall not expect the conditional probabilities to be

exactly zero but rather very close to 0. For that reason, we introduce a contra-

diction probability tolerance value ǫ to reﬂect those uncertainties related to the

probabilistic dependencies among the variables in the CBN1. The approximate

contradiction is thus deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 1 (ǫ-Contradiction). Given a CBN, a set of observed variables

OBS’, a new observation onew on a variable Onew, and a real number 0 ≤

ǫ ≤1. OBS’ is ǫ-Contradictory to onew when

P(Onew = onew|OBS’) ≤ǫ

So, we say that we have an ǫ-Contradiction when there is a subset of OBS’

of observations that have become obsolete and contradict onew. We refer to the

set of all obsolete observations as Sonew. In the following, a set of observations

is said to be consistent when there is no ǫ-Contradiction with onew. At this

stage, we can introduce the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Given a CBN, a new observation onew on a variable Onew

and a set of observed variables OBS’. If OBS’ is ǫ-Contradictory to onew,

then there exists a unique subset Sonew ⊆OBS’ of obsolete observations that

is ǫ-Contradictory to onew and such that OBS’ \ Sonew is consistent, i.e.,

P(Onew = onew|OBS’ \ Sonew) > ǫ.

Proof. Existence.

If OBS’ is ǫ-Contradictory after acquiring onew, then we consider two hy-

potheses: either onew is uncertain or invalid and then contradicts OBS’, or

there are, among the observations of OBS’, those that have become obsolete

and then contradict onew. Since we assumed at the beginning of the paper

that the newly acquired observation is certain, then the ﬁrst hypothesis will

be discarded. Hence there exists a subset of OBS’ that contains obsolete ob-

servations responsible for the contradiction.

Proof. Uniqueness.

Assume that there exists two diﬀerent sets of obsolete observations S1 ⊆OBS’

and S2 ⊆OBS’ that are ǫ-Contradictory to onew and such that P(Onew =

onew|OBS’ \ S1) > ǫ and P(Onew = onew|OBS’ \ S2) > ǫ. Since S2 ⊆OBS’,

1 We show later how to carefully choose the threshold ǫ associated with the given CBN



14

Salma Chaieb et al.

Fig. 2 The Markov Blanket of Onew illustrated on a sample scenario on part of the CBN

then the withdrawal of S1 from OBS’ is not suﬃcient to restore its consis-

tency with onew, i.e., P(Onew = onew|OBS’ \ S1) ≤ǫ. This contradicts the

assumption that P(Onew = onew|OBS’ \ S1) > ǫ. So Sonew is unique.

In what follows, we show how to progressively obtain the set Sonew from

OBS’, looking for all possible obsolete observations.

4.1 Contradictory set restriction

When OBS’ is ǫ-Contradictory to onew, it does not mean that all observations

in OBS’ are obsolete. Let us consider the example shown in Fig. 2 on which

we approach the steps of the obsolete information detection process.

Example 2 At time t1, the set of observations OBS includes nine observations

related to an elderly person: she is a woman, she lives alone and she does not

have a stroke, does not have dementia, does not have muscle impairment,and

she does not suﬀer from fracture. Moreover, she has a good eyesight, drives

her car and does her shopping regularly. At time t2, new information showing

that Mrs. Wilson has lost her autonomy arrives.

This new information contradicts the set OBS’, but, it is clear that the

contradiction occurs regardless of the elderly’ sex. Hence, information about

the person’s sex is not a necessary part of the set Sonew of obsolete observations.




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


15

According to the Bayesian net assumption, when all nodes of the Markov

Blanket of the node Onew are observed, Onew becomes independent of any

other node. We now consider that case, i.e., we assume now that the spouses,

parents and children of Onew are all observed (see Fig. 2). Thus all the variables

of MB(Onew) have an observation in OBS’. The gray area in Fig. 2 represents

the Markov blanket as explained in Sect. 2. Here, we can restrict OBS’ to the

subset Sonew of observations included in MB(Onew) as follows:

Sonew ⊆OBS’ ∩MB(Onew)

Therefore, when we have a contradiction, instead of exploring the whole set

OBS’ looking for obsolete observations, we only need to check observations

on variables of the Markov Blanket of Onew.

Now, if we do not consider the assumption about the parent, children, and

spouse nodes of the new observation, the set OBS’ of contradictory observa-

tions can be restricted in Sonew as follows instead:

Sonew ⊆OBS’ such that there exists an active path between

Onew and each element of Sonew.

We conclude this section with the following proposition:

Proposition 2. Given a CBN and a new observation onew on a variable

Onew, a set OBS’ that is ǫ-Contradictory to onew and a non-empty subset

Sonew ⊆OBS’ such that Sonew contains all the nodes of OBS’ for which

there exists an active path with Onew, the following statements are true:

(1) Any observation of Sonew may belong to the set of obsolete observation

after acquiring onew; and

(2) Any observation of OBS’ \ Sonew does not belongs to the set of obsolete

observations after acquiring onew.

Proof. This proposition comes from the fact that (1) any variable X in Sonew

is dependent on Onew through the existence of an active path from X to Onew

and hence may be obsolete; (2) Any variable in OBS’ \ Sonew is independent

of Onew by using the notion of active path and hence cannot be obsolete.

4.2 Contradictory set decomposition

Up till now, we have shown that OBS’ can be restricted to Onew’s dependent

variables in Sonew. The decomposition phase takes place in two stages: as

a ﬁrst step, we decompose Sonew further into subsets, Si, by bringing the

observations on dependent variables together. The decomposition is based on

studying the causal relationships between variables. Indeed, if two variables

are conditionally dependent, updating one variable can inﬂuence the other.

This allows us to interpret the interaction between the given observations and

give us a more precise idea of the priority of updating them.

Depending on the causal structure of the CBN, the subset Si can take one

of the following three forms: as shown in Fig. 3:



16

Salma Chaieb et al.

Fig. 3 An example of decomposition

– Si contains all the causes of the common eﬀect Onew,

– Si only contains an eﬀect of Onew, when there are no other causes of this

eﬀect, and

– Si contains an eﬀect of Onew and the other variables that cause this eﬀect

if they exist.

Let us consider the example shown in Fig. 2 in which Sonew is in the

grey region. Indeed, once Onew is observed, its direct causes fracture, stroke,

muscleImpairment, and dementia are dependent on one another, unlike its

direct eﬀects driveCar, doShopping, and livesAlone which are conditionally

independent. So we gather all direct causes of Onew in the same subset and

each eﬀect with its causes, except Onew, in a subset. The result of such de-

composition give the set Sonew = {{(fracture,no), (stroke,no), (muscleImpair-

ment,no), (dementia,no)}, {(visionPb,no), (driveCar,2)}, {(doShopping,2)},

{(livesAlone,yes)}}.

In the general case, we decompose Sonew by bringing the observations on

dependent variables together. Indeed, as mentioned earlier in Sect. 4.1, two

variables are dependent in the CBN if and only if there exists an active path

between them. In some cases, when decomposing observations, subsets may

overlap. The same observation may appear concurrently in diﬀerent subsets

Si, as it may depend on several subsets of observations. However, we show

later that this speciﬁc case does not raise any problems.

As a second step, we explore all subsets Si resulting from the ﬁrst phase of

decomposition, and for each one, we check whether it is consistent with onew

or not. If so, it will be ignored and will not be considered in the rest of the

obsolete information identifying process. This aims to reduce the search space

of obsolete observations. So as a result of these two stages of decomposition,




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


17

we have a set Sonew of subsets Si of observations and their related variables.

Each subset obeys these two decomposition properties:

Property 1. Each subset Si resulting from the decomposition phase contains

dependent variables.

Property 2. Each subset Si resulting from the decomposition phase is ǫ-

Contradictory to onew, given the CBN.

At this point, the main obsolete information detection process will revolve

around each ǫ-Contradictory subset Si. Following the example shown in Fig. 3,

and respecting the 3 possible forms of the subset Si, the observations into Si

are organized so that in case of contradiction, three explanations are possible:

Explanation 1: in the case where Si contains all causes of onew (group 1

in Fig. 3), at least x1,1 or x2,1 or both cannot cause onew. In such a case, we

distinguish two aspects of each observation xi,j contained in the set Si. Either

xi,j is individually ǫ-Contradictory to onew (i.e., P(onew|xi,j) ≤ǫ) or not.

Thereby, we can decompose this Si further into two disjoint ǫ-Contradictory

subsets:

– The AND-Set, SAND

i

, containing each observation in Si that is individually

ǫ-Contradictory to onew, given the CBN,

– The OR-Set, SOR

i

, containing each observation in Si that is not individ-

ually ǫ-Contradictory to onew, given the CBN, but the entire OR-Set is

ǫ-Contradictory to onew, given the CBN.

All the observations in the AND-Set are obsolete and need to be updated,

which is not always the case for those in the OR-Set. Let’s explain this tricky

situation with the following example: if we suppose that leaving home (Onew) is

conditioned by both events: driving a car (X1) or shopping (X2). We know that

an older adult does not drive his car (X1, no) and does not go shopping (X2,

no). A new observation given by an external sensor showing that he has left

his house (Onew, yes). Certainly, this new observation raises a contradiction

with what we already know, i.e., {(X1, no), (X2, no)} is ǫ-Contradictory to

(Onew, yes). However, if we inspect each of these observations separately, we

ﬁnd that each of them is not individually ǫ-Contradictory to (Onew, yes).

Indeed, since these observations are conditionally dependent, P(Onew =

yes|X2 = no) > ǫ comes from the fact that the elderly may have driven her

car. The same applies to P(Onew = yes|X1 = no) > ǫ. So, both (X1, yes)

and (X1, yes) are placed in the OR-Set, which meaning that updating one of

these two old observations is enough to remove the ǫ-Contradiction. However,

with the available knowledge at our disposal, we are not able to accurately

infer which one(s) should be updated. Consider this scenario now replacing

the observations (no, no, yes) respectively on the variables (X1, X2, Onew)

with (yes, yes, no). The observations on the two variables X1 and X2 are in-

dividually ǫ-Contradictory to (Onew, no) and will be placed into the AND-Set.



18

Salma Chaieb et al.

Explanation 2: in the case where Si contains the eﬀect of onew (group 2

in Fig. 3), the contradiction is explained by the fact that onew cannot cause

x3,2, i.e., that x3,2 is individually ǫ-Contradictory to onew and is therefore

classiﬁed in an AND-Set of Si.

Explanation 3: in the case where Si contains the eﬀect of onew and its

other causes (group 3 in Fig. 3), the contradiction is explained by the fact that

at least onew or x5,2 or both cannot cause x4,1. As we previously assumed that

the newly acquired observation onew is certain, meaning it cannot be objected,

then the contradiction is explained by the fact that:

– either x5,2 cannot cause x4,1 given onew and then need to be updated, or

x4,1 cannot be the eﬀect of both x5,2 and onew and then need to be updated.

In this case, both x5,2 and x4,1 are not individually ǫ-Contradictory to onew

and then are classiﬁed in an OR-Set of Si. An example is (Onew, X4, X5) =

(leaveHome, NbOfExitsGPS, GPSState), (onew, x4,1, x5,2) = (yes, 0, OK).

– x4,1 cannot be the eﬀect of onew independently of x5,2, meaning that x4,1 is

individually ǫ-Contradictory to onew and then is classiﬁed in an AND-Set.

An example is (Onew, X4, X5) = (diabetes, drugsNb, cardiovascularDrugs),

(onew, x4,1, x5,2) = (yes, 0, no).

Note that in general, the OR-Set may contain extra-elements, i.e., obser-

vations that are not part of the ǫ-Contradiction. In such a case, we proceed by

elimination. We remove an observation from this set, and we check whether

the remaining set is ǫ-Contradictory to onew given the CBN. If so, then the

observation removed is not among those responsible for contradiction and it

must be then ignored. We apply the same treatment to all observations of the

OR-Set in order to have a set containing only potentially obsolete observa-

tions, and such that the withdrawal of any observation from this set restores

its consistency with onew.

4.3 AND-OR tree composition

As a result of the decomposition phase, we obtain the set Sonew of obsolete

observations, which satisﬁes the proposition 1.

Each Si ∈Sonew is divided into two subsets: SAND

i

and SOR

i

. The main

aim of the current phase is to combine the results of these subsets to create

an explanation AND-OR tree whose internal nodes are labeled either AND

or OR and whose leaves represent all possible obsolete observations in each

SAND

i

and SOR

i

subset.

The explanation AND-OR tree is constructed as follows. We introduce a

root node labeled AND. Then, for each subset Si, we introduce an AND node

whose parent is the root node. Next, for each AND-Set (resp. OR-Set) of Si,

we introduce an AND (resp. OR) node whose parent is the corresponding node

of Si and a child leaf node for each observation in SAND

i

(resp. SOR

i

). Each

leaf node is labeled with the obsolete observation.




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


19

Fig. 4 The explanation AND-OR tree related to example 2

Fig. 5 The explanation AND-OR tree related to example 2 after being simpliﬁed

Fig. 4 shows the resulting explanation AND-OR tree associated with Ex-

ample 2. The left branch of the tree corresponds to the ǫ-Contradictory Subset

S1, which is divided into two disjoint ǫ-Contradictory Subsets the AND-Set:

SAND

1

= ∅, and the OR-Set: SOR

1

= {(fracture, no), (strokeTIA,no), (muscle-

Impairment, no), (dementia, no)}. The same reasoning applies for the other

three sets S2, S3, and S4. The resulting AND-OR tree can be simpliﬁed as

shown in Fig. 5.

The AND-OR tree represents precisely the set of obsolete observations

Sonew and explains the logical relationships among its AND-Sets and OR-

Sets. Indeed, given a new observation onew and an AND-OR tree T that

represents the set of obsolete observations relative to onew, the following three

propositions are true:

Proposition 3. For each observations x ∈OBS’, x /∈T if and only if x is

not obsolete.

Proof.

”=⇒” if x /∈T then x is not part of the set of obsolete observations since

T reﬂects this set. So x is not obsolete.

”⇐=” x is not obsolete means that x is not part of the set of obsolete obser-

vations and since T represents this set then x /∈T .

Proposition 4. All observations of the AND-Set are obsolete.



20

Salma Chaieb et al.

Proof.

Follows immediately from the fact that each observation in the AND-Set

is individually ǫ-Contradictory to the new observation given the CBN.

Proposition 5. At least one observation of the OR-Set is obsolete.

Proof. Follows immediately from: (1) the fact that none of the observations

is individually ǫ-Contradictory to the new observation given the CBN; (2)

the OR-Set is ǫ-Contradictory to the new observation; and (3) removing any

observation from the OR-Set restores its consistency with onew, but we can not

know exactly which one is obsolete. Thus, each of the observations contained

in the OR-Set is likely to be involved in the contradiction

As stated previously in Sect. 4.2, a same observation may appear concur-

rently in diﬀerent subsets Si. However, it behaves in precisely the same way in

all the subsets to which it belongs. Indeed, if this observation is individually

ǫ-Contradictory (resp. ǫ-non Contradictory) to onew given the CBN, it will ap-

pear in the AND-Set (resp. OR-Set) of each Si and in any case, it must (resp.

may) be updated. This is, therefore, a simple duplication that can easily be

handled.

5 Obsolete Information Detection Algorithm

We now deﬁne the main steps of the algorithm 1 for building an AND-OR

tree. The inputs to Obsolete Information Detection Algorithm (OIDA) is a

Algorithm 1 Obsolete Information Detection Algorithm (OIDA)

Input: (Onew, onew), B

Output: Explanation AND-OR Tree

Parameters: ǫ: a real number, 0 ≤ǫ ≤1

1: let OBS’ be the set of observations and their associated variables in B except

(Onew, onew).

2: Sonew = P rune(OBS’, Onew, B).

3: if IsContradictory(Sonew, (Onew, onew), B, ǫ) then

4:

Sonew = Decompose(Sonew, B, ǫ).

5:

let Sonew = {S1, ..., Si, ..., Sp} such that each Si is ǫ-Contradictory to onew given B.

6:

AND-OR-Tree ←Compose(S1) ∧... ∧Compose(Si) ∧... ∧Compose(Sp).

7:

return AND-OR-Tree

8: else

9:

return True

10: end if

CBN B and a new information denoted by (Onew, onew). As a ﬁrst step, the

new information arrives. In a second step, as shown in Fig. 1, our system

tries to ﬁnd the obsolete candidate variables that may be involved in a case

of contradiction by computing Sonew using the function Prune (line 2). This

function takes as input the set of observed variables OBS’ and restricts it to

Sonew representing only the dependent ones of Onew. So, instead of processing




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


21

Function Compose

Input: Si

Output: AND-OR sub-tree relating to Si

1: Compute SAND

i

the AND-Set of Si

2: Compute SOR

i

the OR-Set of Si

3: let SAND

i

= {a1, ..., ak}

4: let SOR

i

= {b1, ..., bp}

5: if empty(SAND

i

) ∧empty(SOR

i

) then

6:

return True.

7: else

8:

if empty(SAND

i

) then

9:

return (b1 ∨... ∨bp).

10:

else

11:

if empty(SOR

i

) then

12:

return (a1 ∧... ∧ak).

13:

else

14:

return (a1 ∧... ∧ak) ∧(b1 ∨... ∨bp).

15:

end if

16:

end if

17: end if

the entire CBN, we are only interested in variables that depend on Onew,

which makes a considerable time gain especially since the Prune function is

linear in the number of directed edges and nodes in the CBN [8].

Then, OIDA checks if there is an ǫ-Contradiction between onew and Sonew

(line 3). If so, then our system has to look for obsolete observations (step 3

in Figure 1). Indeed, considering the dependency relations between the CBN

variables, we decompose Sonew (line 4) as explained in Sect. 4.2 into subsets

Si of dependent variables. Then, this function checks the consistency of each

observation given by the set Si to onew and places it appropriately in either the

AND-Set or the OR-Set to get the new decomposed set Sonew. The Decompose

function takes O(E×N 2), where E is the number of directed edges in the given

CBN and N is the number of its variables.

Line 5 of OIDA traverses all elements of Sonew and for each one, we check

whether it is consistent with onew given B. If so, we delete it from Sonew.

Thus, Sonew contains only the ǫ-Contradictory subsets Si to onew given B,

each including the AND-Set and the OR-Set. This aims to reduce the search

space of obsolete observations.

Line 6 of OIDA traverses all elements of Sonew and for each one we call the

main function : Compose(Si). As we have explained in Sect. 4.3, the Compose

function takes as input the set Si subdivided into SAND

i

and SOR

i

, and returns

a sub-tree of obsolete observations relating to each Si. This function takes

O(N 2

s ) time complexity, where Ns is the number of observations in Si. The


## result of OIDA is an AND-OR Tree of all possible obsolete observations.


The OIDA maintains consistency of a database and runs in O(Nd × N 2

s )

where Nd is the size of the set Sonew resulting from decomposition and Ns is

the number of observations in Si.



22

Salma Chaieb et al.

Proposition 6. The Obsolete Information Detection Algorithm is sound and

complete.

Proof. Soundness.

Soundness follows from proposition 4 since each observation individually ǫ-

Contradictory to onew, given the CBN, must be updated and from proposi-

tion 5 since at least one observation of the OR-Set must be updated.

Proof. Completeness.

Completeness follows from the fact that obsolete observations are found only

among Onew dependent variables. So, we check all elements of this ﬁnite set

one by one looking for obsolete ones and we return an AND-OR Tree with at

least one node.

The OIDA answers the following two questions: Is there an ǫ-Contradiction

between the given observations? If so, what are the possible obsolete observa-

tions that cause contradiction?

The ﬁrst question will be answered in the following section. Indeed, to

decide if there is a contradiction or not, it is necessary to refer to a speciﬁc

threshold. Sect. 6 explains how to calculate the threshold. The second question

is answered and theoretically justiﬁed by the propositions and properties given

in Sect. 5 and will be validated experimentally in Sect. 7.

6 Calculating the ǫ threshold

The contradiction detection accuracy is one of the most important criteria

for the success of the obsolete information detection strategy. It is diﬃcult

to deﬁne appropriate thresholds to ﬁnd a compromise between the false-

positive (FP) rate (scenarios labeled as non-contradictory by the expert but

ǫ-Contradictory based on deﬁnition 1) and the false-negative (FN) rate. In

most approximation-based works, parameters are often hard to set. Various


## methods for parameter estimation can be proposed. In an ideal scenario, the


value of ǫ can be set by a domain knowledge expert. In general, small val-

ues of ǫ are preferable. Alternatively, experimental studies and simulations on

real-world databases, i.e. a data-driven approach, can be applied to choose the

optimum value of ǫ and thus minimize human intervention. In what follows,

an experimental design will be used to set the optimal contradiction thresh-

old ǫ, which minimizes classiﬁcation error. The main steps of the threshold

calculation approach are given by algorithm 2.

The inputs of this algorithm are the CBN B and a database S = {(Ci, ci)}

of scenarios labeled by experts. Each scenario Ci is represented by the pair

of newly acquired information (variable, new observation) accompanied by a

sequence of pairs of some previously acquired observations that are consistent

(variable, observed value). For each scenario, Ci, a label ci given by the experts

is associated such as: ci = 1 if Ci is declared contradictory by the experts,

ci = 0 otherwise. Here is an example of a contradictory scenario:

Example 3 OBS = {(heartDisease, no), (drugsNumber, 0)}, the new obser-

vation is (cardiovascularDrugs, yes) and ci = 1.




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


23

Algorithm 2 Threshold Calculation Algorithm

Input: database S = {(Ci, ci)} of scenarios Ci labeled by an expert, Bayesian network B

Output: threshold ǫ

1: for each scenario Ci ∈S do

2:

let (Onew, onew) be the ﬁrst pair of the scenario ci and OBS’ = Ci \{(Onew, onew)}.

3:

calculate pi = P (Onew = onew|OBS’) from B, which represents the conditional

probability associated with the scenario Ci.

4: end for

5: Let CP = {(pi, ci)} be the set of pairs associated with each Si.

6: L = CalculateF P F N(CP) {L is a set of pairs (F N, F P )i for 12 values of i chosen in

the interval ]0, 1[.}

7: return OptimalThreshold(L).

The scenario Si = {(cardiovascularDrugs, yes), (heartDisease, no), (drugs

Number, 0) } is declared contradictory by the expert since ci = 1, and ǫ-

Contradictory by deﬁnition 1 since P(cardiovascularDrugs=yes | OBS’)≤ǫ.

In this paper, our experiments were carried out using a balanced database,

SElderly, containing 560 scenarios relating to several elderly with 280 scenar-

ios labeled as contradictory by the experts and 280 scenarios labeled as non

contradictory by the experts. The scenarios are of diﬀerent sizes containing be-

tween 4 and 41 pairs (variable, observed value), which represent information

about the elderly. A part of this database (≈30% of the database) including

84 contradictory scenarios and 84 non-contradictory scenarios is used to cal-

culate the optimal threshold associated with the CBN used. The rest of this


## database will be used later in Sect. 7 to validate the second part of the OIDA


(the resulting AND-OR trees). The generation of scenarios is done using auto-

matic processing, which consists of (1) randomly selecting variables from the

given CBN, (2) assigning random observations to the selected variables, (3)

arbitrarily choosing a pair (variable, observation) that represents the newly

acquired information. Scenarios are then labeled by two University Hospital

physicians.

To calculate the optimal threshold, we start by calculating the conditional

probability for each instance in SElderly. (line 3 of algorithm 2). This gives us a

set CP of the diﬀerent conditional probabilities of 196 scenarios. Fig. 6 shows

the overlay of the calculated probabilities. At this stage, we notice that prob-

abilities pi of non-contradictory scenarios vary between 0.01 and 1, while that

of contradictory scenarios are between 10−11 and 0.02. Since the two intervals

overlap, no threshold value will completely separate them. For ǫ = 0 (resp.

ǫ = 1), all the scenarios declared contradictory (resp. non-contradictory) by

the experts are misclassiﬁed by our algorithm. So, we try to choose ǫ between

0 and 1 that minimizes the number of misclassiﬁed scenarios. To do so, we call

the function CalculateFP FN, which calculates the FP and FN rates for a suf-

ﬁciently large number of thresholds (12 threshold values in our case) changing

in small discrete steps over the entire range of the interval ]0, 1[.

The results from line 6 of the algorithm are summarized in Fig. 7. A plot

of Hit Rate (along the y axis) against FP rate (along the x axis) for each



24

Salma Chaieb et al.

Fig. 6 Probabilities of 168 scenarios: each point corresponds to P (Onew = onew|OBS’)

threshold gives a Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (ROC curve). Points

on the curve are got by counting the number of true and false contradictions

detection and computing sensitivity and speciﬁcity at each threshold. For cases

where overlap occurs between contradictory and non-contradictory scenarios,

increasing the number of the true-positive (TP) rate will necessarily increase

the number of FP rates. The ROC curve characterizes this trade-oﬀ.

In Fig. 7, we see that the topmost point on the left, which corresponds to

the 10−2 threshold guarantees both better TP and FP rates.

To better justify the threshold value, we draw two curves as a function

of FP and FN rates for the selected threshold values, as shown in Fig. 8. It

is interesting to note that the two curves intersect at the point 10−2, which

corresponds to the same value designated by the ROC curve.

7 Experimental results: towards eﬀective fall-prevention systems

The objective of this section is to provide a ﬁrst validation, after having chosen

the optimal threshold, of the OIDA in a real-life application, in particular, in

the elderly healthcare context, and to showcase how the resulting trees can be

used to give reliable recommendations.

The sharp increase in the life expectancy of the world’s population results

in a large number of older adults. This progressive aging has enormous social

and economic consequences. Meanwhile, more and more elderly are living with

chronic conditions that need long-term and ongoing healthcare, preferably in

their home. As this population’s age and associated chronic health conditions




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


25

Fig. 7 ROC curve for 12 threshold values

increase, alternatives to hospital and institutional care are needed. Techno-

logical advances are placing increasing importance on elderly monitoring and

have pushed the frontier of healthcare into the home settings [27,33,46].

In this paper, we are interested in the elderly fall-prevention project. Falls

are more common in elderly people around the world and may have several

painful consequences. Consequently, in order to achieve a reasonable degree of

fall prevention among elderly, several fall prevention strategies and tools have

been proposed and tested with physicians, other health care team members,

patients and some of their family members [18,55].

These systems require monitoring elderly personal database collected from

hospitals, mutual health, and other associations and organizations in caring for

the elderly. This information is continually evolving and may become obsolete

at a given moment and contradict other information. So, it needs to be updated

in order to restore database consistency.

In our work, the information update is carried out in two phases. First,

by identifying contradictory scenarios. Second, by identifying the possible ob-

solete observations that cause contradiction in order to remove them from

the database and collect additional information to expand the database. For

physicians, having such a database for each of their patients, in particular for

elderly patients, can contribute to the improvement of falls prevention as well

as various aging-related diseases. It is an innovative and eﬀective way based on

AI and prediction to help physicians follow their patients by providing them

with some information (or predictive values in case of lack of information) at



26

Salma Chaieb et al.

Fig. 8 False-positive rate against false-negative rate

the right time for the target person. This can greatly oﬀer improved patients

care and diagnosis, reduce costs and develop relationships with their patients.

7.1 Data description

Our experiments are carried out using two databases: Elderly-Data and SElderly.

First, as part of the elderly-fall prevention project, we have access to a real-life


## database, Elderly-Data that contains information on the elderly. It is collected


during the elderly appointments with their attending physician in the Uni-

versity Hospital Falls Clinic of Lille over a 9-year period (2005-2014). The


## database includes about 1174 patient records, each of these records was de-


scribed by 435 patient-history features (binary, denoting presence or absence

of a feature or continuous, expressing the value of a feature). We conducted a

study of these data in collaboration with hospital experts on fall prevention.

This study resulted in the selection of 41 relevant attributes associated with

the characteristics of the elderly (age, gender, BMI, etc.), the main risk factors

for fall (gait/balance disorder, muscle impairment, osteoporosis, environmen-

tal risk, etc.), and possible consequences of fall (fracture, death, etc.). From

this result, besides bibliographic research, and the solicitation of experts, we

built and evaluated a ﬁrst model of the generic knowledge embedded in a CBN

denoted by CBN Elderly. The links between variables and the parameters are

pursued by asking the participated experts, including three university hospital

physicians, whether they agree with them. In addition, experts evaluated the


## resulting marginal distributions and how the distributions change after observ-





## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


27

ing certain variables and were satisﬁed with the results. The causal Bayesian

model can, therefore, be considered valid according to four experts during a

ﬁxed time interval. For full details of the CBN Elderly building process, we refer

the author to [10].

Then our experiments were carried out using 196 contradictory scenarios

and 196 non-contradictory scenarios (≈70% of the database SElderly used to

calculate the threshold). As we stated earlier, the generated scenarios were

transmitted to two experts, an orthopedist and a neurologist, who were not

involved neither in the construction of the CBN Elderly nor in the validation of

the threshold ǫ. For each scenario in SElderly, physicians established whether it

is a contradictory scenario, based on their experiences. Then, for each scenario

labeled as contradictory, these experts provided a list of subsets of all possible

obsolete observations, such that the withdrawal of these subsets restores the

consistency of the remaining observations with the newly acquired one. The


## resulting subsets lists were then organized into AND-OR trees following the


hierarchical structure given by Fig 9. These trees will be compared later with

the result provided by the OIDA algorithm.

Fig. 9 Hierarchical structure of the explanation AND-OR tree.

7.2 Validation process

The validation of our OIDS consists of two parts: measuring the accuracy

of the system in detecting contradictions and evaluating the quality of the

explanation AND-OR trees resulting from our OIDS. The ﬁrst part consists

of measuring the false positive and the false negative rates of our system. The

second part is to compare the AND-OR trees given by our system with the


## results given by the experts. The comparison is made at two levels. At the


ﬁrst level, we check the number of AND nodes (the subsets Si) that appear

in level 2 of each tree as shown in Fig. 9. Then, for each Si node, we compare

the number of leaves that compose each of the SAND

i

and the SOR

i

nodes with

those provided by the experts.



28

Salma Chaieb et al.

7.3 Experimental results

Having chosen 10−2 as the appropriate threshold in Sect. 6, we apply the

OIDA on the 392 remaining scenarios. The results obtained from Step 2 of

Fig. 1 can be summarized as shown in Table 3.

Predicted

392

ǫ-Contradictory

ǫ-non-contradictory

Actual

196

Contradictory

187

9

196

Non contradictory

15

181

Table 3 10−2 Threshold contingency

Fig. 10 An example of 10−2-Contradictory scenarios processing




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


29

For scenarios classiﬁed as ǫ-Contradictory by our system, we apply the ob-

solete observation identifying process (Step 3 in Fig. 1). Owing to space limita-

tions, we cannot display all the results (the AND-OR Trees) issuing from this

step. However, some of the scenarios that were treated by our algorithm are

shown in Fig. 10. Column 2 (resp. 3) of the table given in Fig. 10 contains the

newly (resp. previously) acquired observation(s). Column 4 refers to Sect. 4.1

in which we seek to ﬁnd among the observations previously acquired those

that depend on Onew. To better understand the update process, we detail

the ﬁrst scenario given in Fig. 10: the previously acquired observations set is

OBS = {(dementia,no), (parkinson,no), (muscleImpairment, no), (visionPb,

no), (fearFalling, no), (cardiovascularDrugs, yes), (walkingStick, no), (diﬃ-

cultyBalance, no)}, the new observation is (diﬃcultyWalking, yes). As shown

in column 4, the variable cardiovascularDrugs is independent of Onew, so it

will be ignored. The conditional probability given in column 6 means that the

scenario is contradictory since the resulting value ≤ǫ.

As explained in Sect. 4.2, the decomposition phase gives the set Sonew =

{{(dementia, no), (parkinson,no), (muscleImpairment, no), (visionPb, no),

(diﬃcultyBalance, no)}, { (fearFalling, no)}, {(walkingStick, no)}}. To ﬁnd

out which observations in Sonew are part of the AND-Set and the OR-Set,

we calculate the probability of Onew given Xi for each variable Xi ∈Sonew

dependent on Onew. In our example, we notice that the two observations

(fearFalling, no) and (walkingStick, no) are individually ǫ-Contradictory to

diﬃcultyWalking, yes) since their associated probabilities are less than ǫ. Each

observations in the ﬁrst element of Sonew is individually ǫ-non-contradictory,

but the whole subset {(dementia,no), (parkinson,no), (muscleImpairment,

no), (visionPb, no), (diﬃcultyBalance, no)} is ǫ-Contradictory to onew. As

explained in Sect. 4.2, we proceed by elimination. This process leads to ignore

the observation (diﬃcultyBalance, no) since the withdrawal of this observa-

tion does not restore the consistency of the subset with onew. At the end of

treatment and as shown in column 7 of Fig. 10, the OIDA returns the expla-

nation AND-OR tree of possible obsolete information for scenario 1. For the

sake of convenience, the tree is given by the following logical formula: (A or B

or C or D) and (E) and (F). It means that to integrate the new observation,

we must remove the two observations on E and F, and remove either A or B

or C or D, depending on the user’s choice. The average execution time of a

scenario is about 10ms.

For the 187 scenarios classiﬁed by our OIDA as contradictory, the resulting

AND-OR trees are ideally in line with those given by experts for 175 scenarios.

The credibility and accuracy of the resulting trees are theoretically justiﬁed

by the propositions and properties given in Sect. 5. Our approach eﬃciency

is conﬁrmed experimentally since our simulations on a real database in the

elderly fall prevention context are very encouraging, reaching an accuracy of

93%. An example of the explanation AND-OR tree use is shown in Fig. 11. We

can use the resulting AND-OR trees to generate a list of relevant questions to

ask by physicians (or related personnel) in order to update values of obsolete

observations and get the newer ones if they exist. Furthermore, we can sug-



30

Salma Chaieb et al.

Fig. 11 Personal information update using the AND-OR Tree

gest, among the observations contained in the OR-Sets, the most likely to be

updated based on some priority measures. Besides this, we can help the target

user make the right decisions by suggesting the most likely values which can

replace the obsolete ones with some prediction precision. This may be of great

interest in further research.

7.4 Analysis and validation of the robustness of our approach

The comparison of experimental methods is essential to assess systematic er-

rors and to study the eﬀectiveness and robustness of the proposed approach

in relation to existing work. As mentioned in Sect. 3, the proposed approach

is novel and there is little work close to ours. Currently, there is no read-

ily available method to fairly compare it with our work. In Bayesian belief

update-based methods [22, 50], authors update the knowledge base, which is

not the object of our study. In [30,35], authors use propositional formulas to

represent their knowledge. We therefore cannot apply this logic model since

we work within an uncertain environment that requires uncertainty measures.

In [12], authors propose a classiﬁcation model to detect abnormal pedestrian

trajectories. However, in our work, the investigation does not end with the

detection of anomalies; rather, it includes identifying the input information

responsible for these anomalies in order to update it.

A conceivable technique to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our strategy

is as follows: (1) we attempt to apply our OIDA on the same database of

scenarios SElderly, but with a BN that we learned from training data, (2) we




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


31

try to apply our approach on two other real-life CBNs in two diﬀerent contexts:

diagnosis of liver disorder and monitoring patients in intensive care units.

7.4.1 Results using some usual classiﬁers

First, from the database Elderly-Data and using a structure learning algo-

rithm, we get a 41-variable Bayesian model which is a DAG but not causal,

denoted by BN Elderly. The CPTs are learned from empirical data in Elderly-


## Data once the BN Elderly is built. Since the detection of contradictions is based


on a threshold, and since the threshold depends on the Bayesian model, we

used the method described in Sect. 6 to calculate the appropriate threshold

relative to the learned BN Elderly. The threshold is set at 0.1.

To better understand the eﬀects of causality, we examine the FP rate and

the FN rate of our method (using the CBN Elderly) in comparison to those

obtained using the learned BN Elderly. As can seen from Table 4, the accuracy

of contradictory and non contradictory scenarios detection (step 2 in Fig. 1)

of the proposed method (93%) is better than those using a BN learned from

Elderly-Data (48%).

Accuracy of

contradictory

scenarios detection

Accuracy of

non-contradictory

scenarios detection


## Methods


Accuracy

using BN Elderly

35%

62%

48%

using CBN Elderly

95.4%

92.3%

93.8%

Table 4 Results of OIDS using CBN Elderly and BN

Moreover, we also thought of applying other classiﬁers such as, decision

tree, support vector machine, etc. in order to study their eﬃciency in detect-

ing contradictory scenarios in comparison with our approach. However, given

the nature of our problem and the type of information we manage, it was

found that the other classiﬁers are inappropriate for many reasons. Indeed,

among the 41 variables selected for this study, an arbitrary number of them

can be observed for each scenario Si, i.e., scenarios contained in the database

SElderly do not have the same size (number of observed variables). This sit-

uation makes it very diﬃcult to use usual classiﬁers because a new model

would have to be learned for each possible subset of observed variables related

to a speciﬁc subject, and it makes it almost impossible, because in real-life,

we do not have enough scenarios composed of the same observed variables

related to diﬀerent subjects in order to train the mode. Moreover, the infor-

mation about patients collected can be used by data-driven methods to inform

clinical decision making. However, building machine learning methods to ex-

tract actionable intelligence (such as knowing exactly which observations are

obsolete compared to others and updating them) from observational patient


## data involves causal model, which goes beyond standard supervised learning



## methods for prediction.




32

Salma Chaieb et al.

Causal Bayesian models allow us to overcome these problems since the

same model can be used to evaluate any variable in the model, regarding any

subset of observations. In addition, CBNs allow to combine general causal

knowledge and speciﬁc individual information to analyze and interpret deep,

valuable, and personalized situations such that the reasons and circumstances

underlying unexpected outcomes even from incomplete observations.

7.4.2 Results using two others CBNs

Another way to validate our approach is to apply our OIDA using two CBNs in

two diﬀerent application domains: the HeparII model, denoted by CBN HeparII

for diagnosis of liver disorders; and the Alarm model, denoted by CBN Alarm

for monitoring patients in intensive care units. The experiments are carried

out using two databases, SHeparII and SAlarm, of contradictory and non con-

tradictory scenarios related respectively to CBN HeparII and CBN Alarm.

The CBNHeparII model is built as part of the project HEPAR at the Insti-

tute of Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering of the Polish Academy of

Science, in collaboration with physicians at the Medical Center of Postgradu-

ate Education in Warsaw [6,39]. The structure of the CBNHeparII consists of

73 nodes that represent the patient characteristics required for the diagnosis of

livers disorder and is elicited from expert diagnosticians, while the parameters

are learned from a database of medical cases. The CBN related to the HEPAR

project is available at: http://aragorn.pb.bialystok.pl/~aonisko/.

The CBN Alarm model was developed to simulate causal relations in the

emergency medical system Alarm (A Logical Alarm Reduction Mechanism) [3].

It connects 8 diagnosis, 16 ﬁndings, and 13 intermediate variables used for

monitoring patients in intensive care units. The CBN associated with Alarm is

available at: https://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/discrete-medium.html#alarm.

Two sets of simulated data, SHeparII and SAlarm and two thresholds ǫHeparII

and ǫAlarm were generated respectively from CBN HeparII and CBN Alarm us-

ing the protocol described in Sect. 6. The dataset SHeparII (resp. SAlarm)

contains 460 (resp. 520) scenarios divided equally into contradictory and non-

contradictory scenarios labeled by an infectious diseases specialist and a ra-

diologist (resp. an intensive care anesthetist). The threshold ǫHeparII (resp.

ǫAlarm) is set at 0.05 (resp. 0.02).

We apply our OIDA on the two datasets SHeparII and SAlarm. The objec-

tive is to compare how our system performs compared to human diagnosticians

(i.e. physicians) and whether its impact on detecting personal contradictory

situations and identifying obsolete observations is beneﬁcial. The results of

the two experiments as well as those using our CBN Elderly are summarized in

Table 5. As our system is composed of two parts: the detection of contradic-

tions and the identiﬁcation of obsolete observations, lines 7 and 8 of Table 5

represent, respectively, the accuracy of our system in each phase.

The experiments on the three CBNs showed quite high detection and iden-

tiﬁcation accuracy of obsolescence. The reaction of the physicians to the ﬁrst

trial version of our system was very favorable, and several of them said that




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


33

CBN HeparII

CBN Alarm

CBN Elderly

Nb of variables

73

37

41

ǫ threshold

0.05

0.02

0.01

Nb of scenarios in the


## database S


460

520

560

Sensitivity

93.1%

89.5%

95.4%

Speciﬁcity

94.4%

90.1%

92.3%

Accuracy

93.7%

89.8%

93.87%

Accuracy of AND-OR

Trees identiﬁcation

93.9%

89.5%

93.5%

Table 5 Results of simulations on diﬀerent CBNs.

working with the system is beneﬁcial for them. Moreover, our system did not

have any negative impact on the users, none of the good decisions made by the

doctors were changed, even if the system provided an incorrect answer. It has

led us to the conclusion that our system could be useful in assisting physicians

and other users in detecting abnormal situations, understanding and identi-

fying all possible causes, and deciding how to deal with these situations to

prevent any kind of risk as early as possible.

Note that the error rate of our system comes from imperfections inherent

in the CBN. Thus, some conclusions will be incorrect, no matter how carefully

drawn. Furthermore, a better representation cannot save us: all representations

are imperfect, and any imperfection can be a source of error. Therefore, we

always assume that all results are given with a degree of uncertainty.

8 Conclusion

In this work, we proposed an entirely novel information-updating approach

when a CBN is used as a representation model. The core idea is to identify

obsolete information when it contradicts other newly acquired one in order to

restore a database consistency. Our approach is theoretically supported, ﬁrst,

by the proposition of a new concept ǫ-Contradiction to detect contradictions

between a set of observations. Second, by deﬁning and proving new proper-

ties and propositions to identify obsolete information eﬃciently. We design

a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the information obsolescence problem.

One of the most signiﬁcant contributions is that the results are presented in

an original way, in the form of an explanation AND-OR tree. It encodes all

possible obsolete observations and can be eﬀectively used to update informa-

tion. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed approach on a real


## database in the context of an European elderly fall-prevention project. Our


approach eﬃciency is conﬁrmed experimentally since our simulations are very

encouraging, reaching an accuracy of 93%.

One of the work’s limitations is that the newly acquired information was

assumed to be certain during processing. However, this may not be the case

in real life, and this information may, therefore, make the recommendations



34

Salma Chaieb et al.

inaccurate. We believe that our approach can be improved in future work by

extending the update process to cover checking newly acquired information

for fear of being the primary source of inconsistency. Furthermore, one pos-

sible direction to improve the results is by exploring the information aging

by minutely studying the temporal correlation of each CBN variable. We will

also answer the following questions: how the resulting trees can be used to give

reliable recommendations and how to remove obsolete information from the


## database to restore its consistency. Finally, we aim to conceive a user interface


in order to perform a set of tests of our OIDS by some physicians, using an

iterative and incremental development cycle. We consider the development of

these ideas to be a promising avenue for future research.

Acknowledgements

The present work is part of the ELSAT20202 project, which is co-ﬁnanced

by the European Union with the European Regional Development Fund, the

French state and the Hauts de France Region Council. It is also supported by

the PEJC project (20PEJC 08-03) fund from the Tunisian ministry of higher

education and scientiﬁc research. The experts who provided the estimates for

the used causal Bayesian model and the University Hospital physicians who

validated our scenarios are thanked for their participation.


## References



## 1. Alchourr´on, C.E., G¨ardenfors, P., Makinson, D.: On the logic of theory change: Partial


meet contraction and revision functions. Journal of symbolic logic pp. 510–530 (1985)


## 2. Baioletti, M., Capotorti, A.: A l1 based probabilistic merging algorithm and its appli-


cation to statistical matching. Applied Intelligence 49(1), 112–124 (2019)


## 3. Beinlich, I.A., Suermondt, H.J., Chavez, R.M., Cooper, G.F.: The alarm monitoring


system: A case study with two probabilistic inference techniques for belief networks. In:

AIME 89, pp. 247–256. Springer (1989)


## 4. Bertossi, L., Geerts, F.: Data quality and explainable ai. Journal of Data and Informa-


tion Quality (JDIQ) 12(2), 1–9 (2020)


## 5. Bloemeke, M.R.: Agent-encapsulated bayesian networks. University of South Carolina


(1998)


## 6. Bobrowski, L.: Hepar: Computer system for diagnosis support and data analysis. Prace


IBIB 31, 27–48 (1992)


## 7. Brown, W., Gyenis, Z., R´edei, M.: The modal logic of bayesian belief revision. Journal


of Philosophical Logic 48(5), 809–824 (2019)


## 8. Butz, C.J., dos Santos, A.E., Oliveira, J.S.: Relevant path separation: A faster method


for testing independencies in bayesian networks. In: Conference on Probabilistic Graph-

ical Models, pp. 74–85 (2016)


## 9. Chaieb, S., Delcroix, V., Mrad, A.B., Grislin-Le Strugeon, E.: R´eseau bay´esien pour la


gestion de l’obsolescence dans une base d’informations en vue de l’´evaluation du risque

de chute des personnes ˆag´ees. In: EGC, pp. 359–364 (2018)


## 10. Chaieb, S., Hnich, B., Mrad, A.B.: Obsolete personal information update system for the


prevention of falls among elderly patients (2021)

2 http://www.elsat2020.org/en




## Data Obsolescence Detection in the Light of Newly Acquired Valid Observations


35


## 11. Chen, C.C., Chen, Y.T., Sun, Y., Chen, M.C.: Life cycle modeling of news events using


aging theory. In: European conference on machine learning, pp. 47–59. Springer (2003)


## 12. Chen, Z., Cai, H., Zhang, Y., Wu, C., Mu, M., Li, Z., Sotelo, M.A.: A novel sparse


representation model for pedestrian abnormal trajectory understanding. Expert Systems

with Applications 138, 112753 (2019)


## 13. Cholvy, L., Perrussel, L., Th´evenin, J.M.: Using inconsistency measures for estimating


reliability. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 89, 41–57 (2017)


## 14. Cormode, G., Tirthapura, S., Xu, B.: Time-decaying sketches for sensor data aggre-


gation. In: Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Principles of

distributed computing, pp. 215–224 (2007)


## 15. Darwiche, A.: Modeling and reasoning with Bayesian networks. Cambridge University


Press (2009)


## 16. Darwiche, A., Pearl, J.: On the logic of iterated belief revision. Artiﬁcial intelligence


89(1-2), 1–29 (1997)


## 17. Deng, Y.: Generalized evidence theory. Applied Intelligence 43(3), 530–543 (2015)



## 18. Dhiman, C., Vishwakarma, D.K.: A review of state-of-the-art techniques for abnormal


human activity recognition. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 77, 21–45

(2019)


## 19. Farazi, S., Klein, A.G., Brown, D.R.: Fundamental bounds on the age of information


in multi-hop global status update networks. Journal of Communications and Networks

21(3), 268–279 (2019)


## 20. Grichi, Y., Beauregard, Y., Dao, T.M.: An approach to obsolescence forecasting based on


hidden markov model and compound poisson process. International Journal of Industrial

Engineering 1(2), 111–124 (2019)


## 21. Gupta,


A.:

Managing

inventory

obsolescence

for

improved

retail

performance.

https://i.dell.com/sites/csdocuments/Business_smb_sb360_Documents/en/uk/wp-retail-r4-fa-uk.pdf


## 22. Gyenis, Z.: On the modal logic of jeﬀrey conditionalization. Logica Universalis 12(3-4),


351–374 (2018)


## 23. Jensen, F.V., et al.: An introduction to Bayesian networks, vol. 210. UCL press London


(1996)


## 24. Jiang, W., Zhan, J.: A modiﬁed combination rule in generalized evidence theory. Applied


Intelligence 46(3), 630–640 (2017)


## 25. Labreuche, C., Fossier, S.: Explaining multi-criteria decision aiding models with an


extended shapley value. In: IJCAI, pp. 331–339 (2018)


## 26. Laignelet, M., P´ery-Woodley, M.P., Tanguy, L.: D´ecouverte de conﬁgurations de traits


textuels pour la caract´erisation des segments d’obsolescence.

Document num´erique

13(3), 41–68 (2010)


## 27. Liouane, Z., Lemlouma, T., Roose, P., Weis, F., Messaoud, H.: An improved extreme


learning machine model for the prediction of human scenarios in smart homes. Applied

Intelligence 48(8), 2017–2030 (2018)


## 28. Livshits, E., Bertossi, L., Kimelfeld, B., Sebag, M.: The shapley value of tuples in query


answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08679 (2019)


## 29. Livshits, E., Ilyas, I.F., Kimelfeld, B., Roy, S.: Principles of progress indicators for



## database repairing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.06492 (2019)



## 30. Livshits, E., Kimelfeld, B.: The shapley value of inconsistency measures for functional


dependencies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.13819 (2020)


## 31. London, B.: Ending the depression through planned obsolescence. Revue du MAUSS


(2), 47–50 (2014)


## 32. Luo, G., Zhao, B., Du, S.: Causal inference and bayesian network structure learning


from nominal data. Applied Intelligence 49(1), 253–264 (2019)


## 33. Malazi, H.T., Davari, M.: Combining emerging patterns with random forest for complex


activity recognition in smart homes. Applied Intelligence 48(2), 315–330 (2018)


## 34. Mastrangelo, C.M., Olson, K.A., Summers, D.M.: A risk-based approach to forecasting


component obsolescence. Microelectronics Reliability 127, 114330 (2021)


## 35. Meliou, A., Gatterbauer, W., Nath, S., Suciu, D.: Tracing data errors with view-


conditioned causality. In: Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD International Con-

ference on Management of data, pp. 505–516 (2011)


## 36. Meliou, A., Roy, S., Suciu, D.: Causality and explanations in databases. Proceedings of


the VLDB Endowment 7(13), 1715–1716 (2014)



36

Salma Chaieb et al.


## 37. Mellal, M.A.: Obsolescence–a review of the literature. Technology in Society 63, 101347


(2020)


## 38. Mrad, A.B., Delcroix, V., Piechowiak, S., Leicester, P., Abid, M.: An explication of


uncertain evidence in bayesian networks: likelihood evidence and probabilistic evidence.

Applied Intelligence 43(4), 802–824 (2015)


## 39. Oni´sko, A., Druzdzel, M.J., Wasyluk, H.: Extension of the hepar ii model to multiple-


disorder diagnosis. In: Intelligent Information Systems, pp. 303–313. Springer (2000)


## 40. Paik, J.H.: Parameterized decay model for information retrieval. ACM Transactions on


Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 7(3), 1–21 (2016)


## 41. Pearl, J.: Bayesian inference. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks


of plausible inference. 2nd ed. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publisher pp. 29–75

(1988)


## 42. Pearl, J.: Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference.


1990 morgan kaufmann. San Mateo, California (1988)


## 43. Pearl, J.: Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika 82(4), 669–688 (1995)



## 44. Pearl, J.: Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference.


Elsevier (2014)


## 45. Pearl, J., Mackenzie, D.: The book of why: the new science of cause and eﬀect. Basic


books (2018)


## 46. Raeiszadeh, M., Tahayori, H., Visconti, A.: Discovering varying patterns of normal and


interleaved adls in smart homes. Applied Intelligence 49(12), 4175–4188 (2019)


## 47. Rens, G.: A stochastic belief change framework with an observation stream and defaults


as expired observations. In: DARe@ ECAI (2016)


## 48. Sandborn, P.A., Mauro, F., Knox, R.: A data mining based approach to electronic part


obsolescence forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Components and Packaging Technolo-

gies 30(3), 397–401 (2007)


## 49. Sanguri, K., Mukherjee, K.: Forecasting of intermittent demands under the risk of in-


ventory obsolescence. Journal of Forecasting (2021)


## 50. Schwering, C., Lakemeyer, G., Pagnucco, M.: Belief revision and projection in the epis-


temic situation calculus. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 251, 62–97 (2017)


## 51. Str¨oßner, C.: Compositionality meets belief revision: a bayesian model of modiﬁcation.


Review of Philosophy and Psychology pp. 1–22 (2020)


## 52. Wang, D., Zhang, Q., Liu, J.: Partial network coding: Theory and application for con-


tinuous sensor data collection. In: Quality of Service, 2006. IWQoS 2006. 14th IEEE

International Workshop on, pp. 93–101. IEEE (2006)


## 53. Wang, H., Ding, X., Li, J., Gao, H.: Rule-based entity resolution on database with


hidden temporal information. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering

30(11), 2199–2212 (2018)


## 54. Wu, X., Yang, J., Wu, J.: Optimal status update for age of information minimization


with an energy harvesting source. IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and

Networking 2(1), 193–204 (2017)


## 55. Xiong, X., Min, W., Zheng, W.S., Liao, P., Yang, H., Wang, S.: S3d-cnn: skeleton-


based 3d consecutive-low-pooling neural network for fall detection. Applied Intelligence

50(10), 3521–3534 (2020)