Automating Transfer Credit Assessment in

Student Mobility - A Natural Language

Processing-based Approach

Dhivya Chandrasekarana,1 and Vijay Magoa,

aDepartment of Computer Science, Lakehead University, 955 Oliver Road, Thunder Bay, P7B5E1

This manuscript was compiled on April 6, 2021

on the competencies; achieved by students on completion of a

respective course or program. To standardize this assessment,

LOs are categorized into various levels based on Bloom’s

taxonomy. Bloom’s taxonomy proposed by Benjamin Bloom

(3) attempts to classify the learning outcomes into six diﬀerent

categories based on their “complexity and speciﬁcity”, namely

knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis,

and evaluation.

Semantic similarity, being one of the most researched Natu-

ral language processing (NLP) tasks, has seen signiﬁcant break-

throughs in recent years with the introduction of transformer-

based language models. These language models employ at-

tention mechanisms to capture the semantic and contextual

meaning of text data and represent them as real-valued vec-

tors, that are aligned in an embedding space such that the

angle between these vectors provides the similarity between

the text in consideration. In an attempt to reduce the inherent

complexity and bias, and exploit the advancements in the ﬁeld

of NLP, we propose a model that determines the similarity be-

tween courses; based on the semantic and taxonomic similarity

of their learning outcomes. The proposed model

Student mobility or academic mobility involves students moving be-

tween institutions during their post-secondary education, and one of

the challenging tasks in this process is to assess the transfer cred-

its to be offered to the incoming student. In general, this process

involves domain experts comparing the learning outcomes of the

courses, to decide on offering transfer credits to the incoming stu-

dents. This manual implementation is not only labor-intensive but

also inﬂuenced by undue bias and administrative complexity. The

proposed research article focuses on identifying a model that ex-

ploits the advancements in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Process-

ing (NLP) to effectively automate this process.

Given the unique

structure, domain speciﬁcity, and complexity of learning outcomes

(LOs), a need for designing a tailor-made model arises. The proposed

model uses a clustering-inspired methodology based on knowledge-

based semantic similarity measures to assess the taxonomic similar-

ity of LOs and a transformer-based semantic similarity model to as-

sess the semantic similarity of the LOs. The similarity between LOs

is further aggregated to form course to course similarity. Due to the

lack of quality benchmark datasets, a new benchmark dataset con-

taining seven course-to-course similarity measures is proposed. Un-

derstanding the inherent need for ﬂexibility in the decision-making

process the aggregation part of the model offers tunable parame-

ters to accommodate different scenarios.

While providing an efﬁ-

cient model to assess the similarity between courses with existing

resources, this research work steers future research attempts to ap-

ply NLP in the ﬁeld of articulation in an ideal direction by highlighting

the persisting research gaps.

arXiv:2104.01955v1  [cs.CL]  5 Apr 2021

• ascertains taxonomic similarity of LOs based on Bloom’s

taxonomy.

• determines semantic similarity of LOs using RoBERTa

language model.

Natural Language Processing | Semantic Similarity | Articulation Agree-

Signiﬁcance Statement

ments | Higher Education

With the increase in the number of student mobility across insti-

tutions, the focus on ensuring a seamless transition has gained

signiﬁcance. Since manual assessment of transfer credit is

labor-intensive and biased, this article attempts to leverage the

recent advancements in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Process-

ing to automate the assessment of transfer credits offered by

institutions to incoming students. Taking into consideration the

structure and semantics of learning outcomes, the proposed

model aggregates the similarity between learning outcomes to

determine course level similarity. To offer ﬂexibility to decision-

making authorities, three tunable parameters are provided to

adjust leniency. The article also discusses the various chal-

lenges facing future research in applying NLP techniques in

the ﬁeld of transfer and articulation.

W

ith the signiﬁcant growth in the enrollment of students

in post-secondary institutions and the growing trend

of interest in diversifying one’s scope of education, there is

an increasing demand among the academic community to

standardize the process of student mobility. Student mobility

is deﬁned as “any academic mobility which takes place within

a student’s program of study in post-secondary education (1).”

Student mobility could be both international and domestic.

While there are various barriers to student mobility, oﬀering

transfer credits for students moving from one post-secondary

institution to another is considered one of the most critical

and labor-intensive tasks (2). Various rules and regulations

are proposed and adopted by institutions across diﬀerent levels

(provincial, national, or international) to assess transfer credits,

but most of these methods are time-consuming, subjective,

and inﬂuenced by undue human bias. The key parameter used

in assessing the similarity between programs or courses across

institutions is learning outcome (LO), which provides context

D.C. conceived and designed the analysis, collected the data and wrote the paper, V.M is the

principal supervisor.

The authors declare no competing interest

1 To whom correspondence may be addressed. E-mail: dchandra@lakeheadu.ca

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

1–13



Sample Learning Outcome:

Action Words

Research and apply the latest databases management strategies

Descriptor - demonstrated learning

Fig. 1. Learning Outcome

education and credit evaluation.

In the United Kingdom,

institutions like Southern England Consortium for Credit Ac-

cumulation and Transfer (SEEC) and Northern Universities

Consortium for Credit Accumulation and Transfer (NUCCAT)

oversee the collaboration between universities to allocate aca-

demic credits which are treated as currency awarded to stu-

dents on completion of requirements. Canada oﬀers provincial

supervision of articulation agreements between institutions,

with the provinces of British Columbia and Alberta leading

and the provinces of Ontario and Saskatchewan following yet

way behind. The Ontario Council on Articulation and Transfer

(ONCAT) carries out funded research to explore venues to

increase the agreements between universities and colleges in

Ontario. The credit transfer system in the United States is

decentralized and often carried out by non-proﬁt organizations

designated for this speciﬁc purpose. In Australia, the eight

most prominent universities established the Go8 credit trans-

fer agreement to oﬀer credit to students who move between

these institutions. While there are various such governances

on a national level, most international credit evaluations are

carried out in a need-based manner. In addition to being an

academic barrier; credit evaluation also has a direct impact

on one of the most important non-academic barriers - the

ﬁnancial barrier. Hence, all agencies oﬀer special attention

to make this process fair and accessible to the population of

mobile students worldwide.

• provides a ﬂexible aggregation method to determine the

overall similarity between courses.

In the Background section, we describe the background of the

student mobility process and semantic similarity techniques. In

the Methodology section, where describe in detail the various

components of the proposed methodology followed by the


## discussion of results in the Results section. In the Challenges


section, we annotate the challenges in automating the process

of assessing transfer credit and conclude with the future scope

of research in the ﬁnal section.


## Background


This section provides a brief overview of the student mobility

process across the world and the structural organization of

learning outcomes. Various semantic similarity methods devel-

oped over the years are discussed in the ﬁnal sub-section thus

providing an insight into the necessary concepts to understand

the importance of the research and the choices made to develop

the proposed methodology.

Student Mobility. The movement of students across institutions

for higher education has been in existence for decades in the

form of international student exchange programs, lateral trans-

fers, and so on. Governments across the world follow diﬀerent

measures to standardize the process to ensure transparency

and equity for students. According to the Organisation for

Economic Co-operation and Development (OCED) indicators,

there are approximately 5.3 million internationally mobile stu-

dents (4). Mobile students include both international students

who cross borders to pursue education and foreign students

who are from a diﬀerent nationality than the country of the

host institution. Mobile students face a wide range of barriers

both academic and non-academic. Academic barriers include

the lack of necessary qualiﬁcations and non-transferability

of credits, while non-academic barriers may include social,

cultural, ﬁnancial, and psychological barriers. Governments

across the world have taken various measures to reduce these

barriers to enable a smooth transition for students.

The

Bologna process formed as a result of the Bologna declaration

of 1999, provides guidance for the European Higher Education

Area comprising 48 countries in the standardization of higher

A. Learning Outcomes. Credit evaluation is carried out by

domain experts in the receiving institution by analyzing the

learning outcomes of the courses the students have completed

in their previous institution. Learning outcomes are often

statements with two distinct components namely the action

words and the descriptor. The descriptor part provides the

knowledge the students have learned in a given course or pro-

gram and the action words provide the level of competency

achieved for each speciﬁc knowledge item. An example of

learning outcomes for a computer programming course is pro-

vided in Fig. 1. The taxonomy for educational objectives was

developed by Bloom et al. (3) and later revised by Anderson et

al. (5). The six levels of the original taxonomy are knowledge,

comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation.

In the revised version, two of these levels were interchanged

2

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



Illustrative Verbs:

generate

combine

construct

formulate

propose

assemble

design

predict

improve

Illustrative Verbs:

justify

conclude

evaluate

verify

conﬁrm

determine

Genera

ting

Planning

Critiqu

ing

Create

Evaluate

Checking

Producing

Summariz

ing

Inferring

Attribut

ing

Explain

ing

Underst

and

Bloom’s

Taxonomy

Analyze

Illustrative Verbs:

explain

summarize

convert

estimate

rearrange

relate

review

derive

interpret

Organiz

ing

Illustrative Verbs:

distinguish

compare

constrast

diﬀerentiate

classify

categorize

Exempli

fying

Interpret

ing

Diﬀerent

iating

Apply

Remember

Illustrative Verbs:

list

state

deﬁne

describe

sketch

discuss

identify

select

insert

complete

Implement

ing

Recalling

Illustrative Verbs:

change

demonstrate

modify

solve

use

show

calculate

Recogniz

ing

Executing

Fig. 2. Bloom’s taxonomy and corresponding illustrative verbs

ods rely on ontologies like WordNet∗, DBPedia†, BabelNet‡,

etc. The ontologies are conceptualized as graphs where the

words represent the nodes grouped hierarchically, and the

edges represent the semantic relationship between the words.

Rada et al. (7) followed a straightforward approach and in-

troduced the path measure in which the semantic similarity

is inversely proportional to the number of edges between the

two words. However, this method ignored the taxonomical

information oﬀered by the underlying ontologies. Wu et al., (8)

proposed the wup measure that measured the semantic simi-

larity in terms of the least common subsumer (LCS). Given

two words, LCS is deﬁned as the common parent they share

in the taxonomy. Leacock et al. (9) proposed the lch mea-

sure by extending the path measure to incorporate the depth

and three levels were renamed to provide better context to

the level of the acquired knowledge. Hence the levels of the

revised taxonomy are “Remember, Understand, Apply, Ana-

lyze, Evaluate, and Create.” Each level encompasses sub-levels

of more concrete knowledge items and these are provided in

Fig. 2. In order to estimate the similarity between learning

outcomes, it is important to understand their structure and

organization.

B. Semantic Similarity. The semantic textual similarity (STS)

is deﬁned as the similarity in the meaning of text data in con-

sideration. Various semantic similarity methods proposed over

the past two decades can be broadly classiﬁed as knowledge-

based and corpus-based methods (6). Knowledge-based meth-

∗https://wordnet.princeton.edu/

†https://www.dbpedia.org/

‡https://babelnet.org/

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

3



of the taxonomy to calculate semantic similarity . The for-

mulations of these methods are provided in Table 4 in the


## Appendix. Other knowledge-based approaches include feature-


based semantic similarity methods, that calculate similarity

using the features of the words like their dictionary deﬁnition,

grammatical position, etc., and information content-based


## methods that measure semantic similarity using the level of in-


formation conveyed by the words when appearing in a context.

Corpus-based semantic similarity methods construct numer-

ical representations of data called embeddings using large

text corpora. Traditional methods like Bag of Words (BoW),

Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) used

one-hot encoding techniques or word counts to generate em-

beddings. These methods ignored the polysemy of text data

and suﬀered due to data sparsity. Mikolov et al. (10) used a

simple neural network with one hidden layer to generate word-

embeddings when used in simple mathematical formulations,

produced results that were closely related to human under-

standing. Pennington et al. (11) used word co-occurrence

matrices and dimension reduction techniques like PCA to

generate embeddings. The introduction of transformer-based

language models, which produced state-of-the-art results in a

wide range of NLP tasks, resulted in a breakthrough in seman-

tic similarity analysis as well. Vaswani et al. (12) proposed the

transformer architecture, which used stacks of encoders and

decoders with multiple attention heads for machine translation

tasks. Delvin et al. (13) used this architecture to introduce

the ﬁrst transformer-based language model, the Bidirectional

Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) that gen-

erated contextualized word embeddings. BERT models were

pre-trained on large text corpora and further ﬁne-tuned to a

speciﬁc task. Various versions of BERT were subsequently re-

leased namely, RoBERTa (14) - trained on a larger corpus over

longer periods of time, ALBERT (15) - a lite version achieved

using parameter reduction techniques, BioBERT (16) - trained

on a corpus of biomedical text, SciBERT (17) - trained on a

corpus of scientiﬁc articles, and TweetBERT (18) - trained on

a corpus of tweets. Other transformer-based language models

like T5 (19), GPT (20), GPT-2 (21), etc., use the same trans-

former architecture with signiﬁcantly larger corpora and an

increased number of parameters. Though these models achieve

state-of-the-art results the computational requirements render

them challenging to implement in real-time tasks (22).

The architecture of the proposed model is presented in Fig.


## 3. The pseudocode for all the three modules in the proposed


model are provided in Appendix.

A. Pass

1:

Taxonomic

similarity. A

clustering-inspired


## methodology is proposed to determine the taxonomic sim-


ilarity between learning outcomes. Six diﬀerent clusters, one

for each level in Bloom’s taxonomy are initialized with a list of

illustrative verbs that best describe the cognitive competency

achieved, speciﬁcally in the ﬁeld of engineering (23), as shown

in Fig. 2. In this pass, the verbs in the learning outcomes

are identiﬁed using spaCy pos tagger§ and WordNet synsets

(24), and then these verbs are used to determine the cluster to

which the learning outcomes are most aligned with. While en-

countering verbs already available in the list, a straightforward

approach is followed and the learning outcomes are assigned

to the respective cluster. However, for learning outcomes with

new verbs, an optimal cluster is determined based on the

semantic similarity between the new verb and the verbs in the

existing clusters. The best measure to calculate this similarity

is determined as a result of the comparative analysis carried

out between various knowledge-based and corpus-based se-

mantic similarity measures. Three knowledge-based measures

namely wup, lch, and path are measured using WordNet ontol-

ogy. In this ontology, there are more than one synsets for verbs

hence it is necessary to identify the best synset. Given a verb

pair, wup, lch, and path select the ﬁrst synset of the verbs,

whereas wupmax, lchmax, pathmax identiﬁes the synset that

has the maximum similarity with the verb pairs. Gerz et al.

(25) proposed SimVerb-3500 a benchmark dataset consisting

of verb pairs with associated similarity values provided by

annotators using crowd-sourcing techniques. The performance

of six knowledge-based semantic similarity measures and word

embeddings models (word2vec and GloVe) on the SimVerb-

3500 is compared and the results are depicted in Fig. 4. The

pseudocode for this algorithm is provided in the Appendix.

The best results are achieved by wup_max measure, hence

used in the clustering process. Silhouette width is deﬁned

as "the measure of how much more similar a data point is to

the points in its own cluster than to points in a neighboring

cluster(26)". The silhouette width of a verb Vi is measured as,

Si =

bi −ai

max(ai, bi)

[1]


## 1. Methodology


where, ai is the average distance between the verb and the

verbs in its own cluster and bi is the average distance between

the verb and the verbs in its neighboring cluster. The following

equations formulate the calculation of these distance measures.

This section describes in detail the three modules of the pro-

posed methodology namely,

• Pass 1: Taxonomic similarity

X

Vk∈Cneig(Vi)

d(Vi, Vk)

• Pass 2: Semantic similarity

X

Vj∈C(Vi)

d(Vi, Vj)

bi =

• Pass 3: Aggregation

|Cneig(Vk)|

ai =

|C(Vj)|

Given the learning outcomes of the courses in comparison,

Pass 1 generates a taxonomic_similarity_grid, and Pass 2

generates a semantic_similarity_grid where the rows and

columns are populated with the learning outcomes, and the

cells are populated with the taxonomic similarity value and

the semantic similarity value. These two grids are further

passed on to Pass 3 where the ﬁnal similarity between learning

outcomes is assessed factoring in both the similarity values

and further aggregated to arrive at the course level similarity.

Vj represent the verbs in the same cluster C and Vk repre-

sent the verbs in the neighboring cluster Cneig, the function

d(Vi, Vj) calculates the distance between the verbs in this case

the wup_measure. The value of S ranges from -1 to 1 where

values closer to 1 indicate that the data point is assigned to

the correct cluster. Based on this principle, when the model

§https://spacy.io/usage/v3

4

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



Pass1 : Semantic Similarity Module

Pass2 : Taxonomic Similarity Module

Sending LOs

Sending LOs

Receiving

Receiving

LOs

SRoBERTa

Taxonomic grids

Semantic grids

LOs

Taxonomic clustering

Pass3 : Aggregation Module

Final similarity grid

>

>

sim_threshold

Impact

lo_threshold

Fig. 3. Proposed model architecture

0.48

0.46

0.46

Pearson's correlation

0.5

0.45

0.38

0.4

0.35

0.28

0.28

0.3

0.23

0.23

0.25

wup

path

lch

wup_max path_max lch_max word2vec

GloVe

0.2

Semantic similarity measures

Fig. 4. Pearson’s correlation of various semantic similarity measures on Simverb3500 dataset. wup(8), path(7), lch(9), word2vec(10), GloVe(11)

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

5



identiﬁes a new_verb in a learning outcome, the silhouette

width for each cluster is determined and the learning outcome

is assigned to the cluster with maximum silhouette width. For

learning outcomes with more than one verb, the verb assigned

to the highest taxonomic level determines the ﬁnal cluster

value of the learning outcome in question. Since each cluster

represents a corresponding level of competency in Bloom’s

taxonomy, the ﬁnal taxonomic similarity between the learning

outcomes is measured as,

C. Pass 3: Aggregation. The focus of the ﬁnal pass is to pro-

vide ﬂexibility in the aggregation process to enable the decision-

making authorities to accommodate the variations in the ad-

ministrative process across diﬀerent institutions. Three im-

portant tunable parameters are provided to adjust the level of

leniency oﬀered by the decision-making authority in providing

credits namely, ‘impact’, ‘sim_threshold’, and ‘lo_threshold’.

Given the taxonomic similarity grid and the semantic simi-

larity grid from Pass 1 and Pass 2 the impact parameter

determines the percentage of contribution of both the similari-

ties to the overall similarity. The ‘sim_threshold’ deﬁnes the

value above which two learning outcomes are considered to be

similar, and ﬁnally, the ‘lo_threshold’ determines the number

of learning outcomes that need to be similar in order to con-

sider the courses in comparison to being similar. The higher

the value of these three parameters the lesser the leniency in

the decision-making process.

The ﬁnal_similarity_grid is built by aggregating the values

from the previous modules, in the ratio determined by the

‘impact’ parameter as shown in Fig. 3. The LOs along the

rows of the grid belong to the receiving institution’s course

hence traversing along the rows, the maximum value in the

cells is checked against the ‘sim_threshold’ value to determine

if the LO in the row is similar to any LO in the columns. The

course level similarity is derived by checking if the number

of learning outcomes having a similar counterpart meets the

‘lo_threshold’.

taxonomic_similarity (lo1, lo2) = abs (Clo1 −Clo2)

[2]

, where Clo1 and Clo2 represent the cluster ids of the learning

outcomes in comparison calculated as,

Cloi = max (C(v1), C(v2)....C(vn))

[3]

where n is the number of verbs in the learning outcome loi

and C(vn) represents the respective cluster of the verb vn. For

two courses having m and n number of learning outcomes, a

m × n dimensional taxonomic_similarity_grid is constructed

and populated with the respective taxonomic_similarity val-

ues.

B. Pass 2: Semantic Similarity. Recent transformer-based lan-

guage models generate contextual word embeddings that are

ﬁne-tuned for a speciﬁc NLP task, and various researchers

have attempted to generate sentence embeddings by averaging

the output from the ﬁnal layer of the language models (27).

However, Reimers et al. (? ) established that these techniques

yielded poor results in regression and clustering tasks like se-

mantic similarity and proposed the Sentence BERT (SBERT)

model to address this issue. SBERT is a modiﬁed version of

BERT-based language models where a siamese network and

triple network structures are added to the ﬁnal layer of the

BERT network to generate sentence embeddings that capture

the semantic properties and thus can be compared using cosine

similarity. Reimers et al. (? ) compared the performance

of both SBERT and SRoBERTa language models in the STS

(28) and SICK (29) benchmark datasets. Owing to the fact

that the model is speciﬁcally designed for semantic similarity

tasks, the computational eﬃciency of the model architecture,

and the signiﬁcant performance achieved, SRoBERTa is used

in this pass to measure the semantic similarity of the LOs.

SRoBERTa uses the base RoBERTa-large model with 24 trans-

former blocks, 1024 hidden layers, 16 attention heads, and

340M trainable parameters with a ﬁnal mean pooling layer.

The model is trained on the AllNLI dataset which contains 1

million sentence pairs categorized into three classes namely

‘contradiction, entailment, and neutral’, and the training data

of the STS benchmark dataset. The semantic similarity be-

tween the learning outcomes is determined by the cosine value

between the embeddings as,


## Dataset and Results


D. Benchmark Dataset. One of the major challenges in the

given ﬁeld of research is the absence of benchmark datasets to

compare the performance of the proposed system. Although

there are existing pathways developed manually, previous re-

search show that most of them are inﬂuenced by bias (based

on the reputation of institutions, year of study, and so on) and

administrative accommodations (30). To create a benchmark


## dataset devoid of bias, a survey was conducted among domain


experts to analyze and annotate the similarity between courses

from two diﬀerent institutions. A survey with learning out-

comes of 7 pairs of courses (sending and receiving) from the

computer science domain was distributed among instructors

from the department of computer science at a comprehensive

research university in Canada. In order to avoid bias, the

names of both the institutions were anonymized and explicit

instructions were provided to the annotators to assume a neu-

tral position. Although the survey was circulated among 14

professors only 5 responses were received. This lack of re-

sponses is mainly attributed to the fact that most faculties are

not involved in the transfer pathway development process and

it is carried out widely as an administrative task. The survey

questionnaire consisted of questions to mark the similarity be-

tween the courses over a scale of 1 to 10 and a binary response

(‘yes’ and ‘no’) for whether or not credit should be oﬀered to

the receiving course. The course pairs were annotated with a

ﬁnal decision value based on the maximum number of ‘yes’

or ‘no’ responses received from the annotators. The results

of the survey are tabulated in Table 1 where the responses

‘yes’ and ‘no’ are color coded in ‘green’ and ’red’ respectively.

One of the interesting inferences from the survey results is the

agreement between the responses in the threshold value of sim-

ilarity above which the annotators were willing to oﬀer credit.

semantic_similarity (lo1, lo2) =

lo1  lo2

s

n

X

[4]

s

n

X

i=1

lo1

i=1

lo2

The semantic_similarity_grid with the dimension of m×n

is formed and the semantic_similarity values are added to

the cells. The output from the two initial passes are fed to

the ﬁnal pass for aggregation.

6

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



Table 1. Survey results for the proposed benchmark dataset.

A1

A2

A3

A4

A5

Final

Annotation

1

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

2

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

3

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

4

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

5

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

6

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

7

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

Table 2. Performance comparison of the proposed model with human

annotation.

parameter. As shown in Table 3 for the lenient setting the

lo_threshold parameter is set at 0.33 and 0.66 and the model

achieves an agreement of 85% with the most lenient annotator

and the most strict annotator, respectively. Similarly, lowering

the impact parameter makes the model more aligned to being

strict and vice versa. However, it is important to understand

that increasing the impact of taxonomic similarity to a higher

percentage results in determining the overall similarity based

on only two or three action words in the learning outcomes.

Decreasing the sim_threshold will make the model more

lenient and increasing it will make the model more strict. The


## results of the model at various parameter settings are provided


in Table 5 and Table 6 in the Appendix.

Proposed


## Methodology


Neutral

Human

Semantic

Similarity

1

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

2

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

3

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

4

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

5

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

6

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

7

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

Agreement

in %

57.16

85.74

Challenges and Future Works

It is pertinent to understand that there are unique challenges

to be addressed in the attempt to automate articulations.

Although the existing transformer-based models achieve near-

perfect results in benchmark datasets, a thorough understand-

ing of these datasets brings to light one of their major short-

comings. Rogers et al. (31) conclude in their survey with a

clear statement on the limitations of the benchmark datasets,

"As with any optimization method, if there is a shortcut in the


## data, we have no reason to expect BERT to not learn it. But


harder datasets that cannot be resolved with shallow heuristics

are unlikely to emerge if their development is not as valued

as modeling work." Chandrasekaran et al. (32) established

the signiﬁcant drop in performance of these models with the

increase in complexity of sentences. The comparison of the

complexity of the learning outcomes in the proposed bench-

mark dataset to the sentences in the STS dataset is shown in

5 , which clearly indicates that learning outcomes are more

complex.

Also, the introduction of domain-speciﬁc BERT

models shows clear indications that though the transformer

models are trained using signiﬁcantly large corpora with mil-

lions of words in their vocabularies, a domain-speciﬁc corpus

is required to achieve better results in domain-speciﬁc tasks.

Learning outcomes are not only complex sentences but also

contain domain-speciﬁc terminologies from various domains.

Identifying these research gaps in semantic similarity meth-

ods is essential to contextualize and focus future research on

addressing them. In addition to the technological challenges,

it is also important to understand the challenges faced in the

ﬁeld of articulation. One of the approaches to enhance the

performance of existing semantic similarity models is to train

them with a large dataset of learning outcomes with anno-

tated similarity values. However, learning outcomes are often

considered to be intellectual properties of the instructors and

4 out of 5 annotators oﬀered credit only if they considered

the similarity between the courses falls above 7 on the given

scale of 1 to 10. It is also interesting to note that in spite of

having no information other than the learning outcomes the

annotators diﬀered in their level of leniency which inspired

the need to oﬀer ﬂexibility to control leniency in the proposed


## methodology. For example, from Table 1 it is evident that


while annotator ‘A2’ has followed a more lenient approach

and oﬀered credit for 6 out of 7 courses, annotator ‘A5’ has

adopted a more strict approach by oﬀering credit for only 1

out of the 7 courses.

E. Results. The results of the proposed model are provided

in Table 2. In order to provide context to the need for the

proposed methodology, the results of the model are compared

to the results obtained when only the semantic similarity of

the learning outcomes is considered. The proposed model at

a neutral setting achieves 85.74% agreement with the human

annotation obtained during the survey while the semantic

similarity model achieves only 54.75% agreement. For the

neutral setting of the proposed model, the three parameters in

the aggregation pass are set as follows. The impact parameter

is set at 30% meaning that the semantic similarity contributes

70% to the overall similarity and the taxonomic similarity

contributes to the remaining 30%. The sim_threshold is set

at 65%, meaning that the overall similarity should be more

than 65% in order for the learning outcomes to be similar to

each other. The lo_threshold is set at 0.5 which considers that

at least half of the available learning outcomes have similar

counterparts. In order to demonstrate the options for ﬂexibility,

the proposed model is run by modifying the lo_threshold

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

7



Table 3. Performance of variations of proposed models with speciﬁc annotators.

Proposed


## methodology


Lenient

Proposed


## methodology


Strict

S.No

Most lenient

annotator

Most strict

annotator

1

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

2

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

3

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

4

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

5

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

6

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

7

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

Agreement

in %

85.74

85.74

Mean Value comparison of Readability indices

0

0

0

20

18.74

16.64

15.04

14.98

14.17

15

9.48

10

7.3

6.71

6.08

5.78

5.52

4.16

5.02

4.4

4.38

4.23

3.95

5

2.27

FK

CL

AR

LW

GF

Aggr_score

0

Learning Outcomes

STS dataset

SICK dataset

Fig. 5. Comparison of the readability indices of the learning outcomes used in the proposed dataset and the existing benchmark datasets (STS and SICK dataset).

corpora, tuning the semantic similarity models with the aid

of datasets and also on ways to improve the generation of

learning outcomes through automation.

are not publicly available. While almost all universities focus

on building quality learning outcomes, most learning outcomes

are either vague or don’t follow the structural requirements

of learning outcomes (33). Even if a signiﬁcant amount of

learning outcomes are collected, annotation of their similarity

requires expertise in subject matter and understanding of the

articulation process. This annotation process is considerably

more expensive than the annotation of English sentences as

well. For example, one of the popular crowdsourcing platforms

charges $0.04 for annotators with no speciﬁcation and $0.65

for an annotator with at least a Master’s degree. Furthermore,

the selection of annotators with the required expertise needs

manual scrutiny using preliminary questionnaires and surveys

which makes the process time-consuming. Finally, articulation

agreements are developed across diﬀerent departments and it

is imminent to provide a clear understanding of the model and

its limitations to encourage automation of the process. While

the proposed model accommodates most of these challenges

by allowing transparency and ﬂexibility in the assessment of

credit transfer, there is scope for improvement, and the fu-

ture research works will focus on developing domain-speciﬁc


## Conclusion


The assessment of transfer credit in the process of student

mobility is considered to be one of the most crucial and time-

consuming tasks, and across the globe, various steps have

been taken to mitigate this process. With signiﬁcant research

and advancements in the ﬁeld of natural language processing,

this research article attempts to automate the articulation

process by measuring the semantic and taxonomic similarity

between learning outcomes. The proposed model uses a recent

transformer-based language model to measure the semantic

similarity and a clustering-inspired methodology is proposed

to measure the taxonomic similarity of the learning outcomes.

The model also comprises a ﬂexible aggregation module to

aggregate the similarity between learning outcomes to course-

level learning outcomes. A benchmark dataset is built by

conducting a survey among academicians to annotate the

8

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



similarity and transfer credit decisions between courses from

two diﬀerent institutions. The results of the proposed model

are compared with those of the benchmark dataset at diﬀerent

settings of leniency. The article also identiﬁes the technical

and domain-speciﬁc challenges that should be addressed in

the ﬁeld of automating articulation.

28.

Y Shao, Hcti at semeval-2017 task 1: Use convolutional neural network to evaluate semantic

textual similarity in Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation

(SemEval-2017). pp. 130–133 (2017).

29.

M Marelli, et al., A SICK cure for the evaluation of compositional distributional semantic mod-

els in Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Eval-

uation (LREC’14). (European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Reykjavik, Iceland),

pp. 216–223 (2014).

30.

JL Taylor, D Jain, The multiple dimensions of transfer: Examining the transfer function in

American higher education. Community Coll. Rev. 45, 273–293 (2017).

31.

A Rogers, O Kovaleva, A Rumshisky, A primer in BERTology: What we know about how

BERT works. Transactions Assoc. for Comput. Linguist. 8, 842–866 (2020).

32.

D Chandrasekaran, V Mago, Domain speciﬁc complex sentence (DCSC) semantic similarity


## dataset (2020) arXiv:2010.12637.


33.

K Schoepp, The state of course learning outcomes at leading universities. Stud. High. Educ.

44, 615–627 (2019).


## Data Availability. The source code used to generate all of


the data associated with this article is provided in this

GitHub repository (https://github.com/Dhivya-C/Transfer-

credit-assessment).


## ACKNOWLEDGMENT. The authors would like to extend our


gratitude to the research team in the DaTALab at Lakehead

University for their support and Arunim Garg for the valuable

feedback and revisions on this publication. We would also

like to thank Lakehead University, CASES and the Ontario

Council for Articulation and Transfer, without their support

this research would not have been possible.

1.

Junor, S., & Usher, A. (2008). Student Mobility & Credit Transfer: A National and Global

Survey. (2008).

2.

A Heppner, A Pawar, D Kivi, V Mago, Automating Articulation: Applying Natural Language

Processing to Post-Secondary Credit Transfer. IEEE Access 7, 48295–48306 (2019).

3.

BS Bloom, DR Krathwohl, Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The Classiﬁcation of Educa-

tional Goals in Handbook I: Cognitive Domain. (1956).

4.

OECD, What is the proﬁle of internationally mobile students? (2019).

5.

LW Anderson, LA Sosniak, Bloom’s taxonomy. (Univ. Chicago Press Chicago, IL), (1994).

6.

D Chandrasekaran, V Mago, Evolution of Semantic Similarity-A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv.

(CSUR) 54, 1–37 (2021).

7.

R Rada, H Mili, E Bicknell, M Blettner, Development and application of a metric on semantic

nets. IEEE transactions on systems, man, cybernetics 19, 17–30 (1989).

8.

Z Wu, M Palmer, Verbs semantics and lexical selection in Proceedings of the 32nd annual

meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. (Association for Computational Lin-

guistics), pp. 133–138 (1994).

9.

C Leacock, M Chodorow, Combining local context and WordNet similarity for word sense

identiﬁcation. WordNet: An electronic lexical database 49, 265–283 (1998).

10.

T Mikolov, K Chen, G Corrado, J Dean, Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector

space (2013) arXiv:1301.3781.

11.

J Pennington, R Socher, CD Manning, GloVe: Global vectors for word representation in

Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing

(EMNLP). pp. 1532–1543 (2014).

12.

A Vaswani, et al., Attention is all you need in NIPS. (2017).

13.

J Devlin, MW Chang, K Lee, K Toutanova, BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Trans-

formers for Language Understanding in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North

American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-

nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). pp. 4171–4186 (2019).

14.

Y Liu,

et al.,

RoBERTa:

A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach (2019)

arXiv:1907.11692.

15.

Z Lan, et al., AlBERT: A lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of Language Representations

in International Conference on Learning Representations. (2019).

16.

J Lee, et al., Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical

text mining. Bioinformatics 36, 1234–1240 (2020).

17.

I Beltagy, K Lo, A Cohan, SciBERT: A pretrained language model for scientiﬁc text in Pro-

ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and

the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP).

pp. 3606–3611 (2019).

18.

MMA Qudar, V Mago, TweetBERT: A pretrained language representation model for twitter

text analysis (2020) arXiv:2010.11091.

19.

C Raffel, et al., Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer

(2019) arXiv:1910.10683.

20.

A Radford, K Narasimhan, T Salimans, I Sutskever, Improving language understanding by

generative pre-training (2018).

21.

A Radford, et al., Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1, 9

(2019).

22.

E Strubell, A Ganesh, A McCallum, Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in

NLP in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-

tics. pp. 3645–3650 (2019).

23.

AJ Swart, Evaluation of ﬁnal examination papers in engineering: A case study using Bloom’s

taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Educ. 53, 257–264 (2009).

24.

GA Miller, Wordnet: A lexical database for English. Commun. ACM 38, 39–41 (1995).

25.

D Gerz, I Vuli´c, F Hill, R Reichart, A Korhonen, Simverb-3500: A large-scale evaluation set

of verb similarity in Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural

Language Processing. pp. 2173–2182 (2016).

26.

PJ Rousseeuw, Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster


## analysis. J. computational applied mathematics 20, 53–65 (1987).


27.

T Zhang, V Kishore, F Wu, KQ Weinberger, Y Artzi, Bertscore: Evaluating text generation

with bert in International Conference on Learning Representations. (2020).

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

9



Algorithm 1 Best semantic similarity measure for verbs

Input: Dverb[v1, v2, s] = SimVerb3500 dataset containing verb pairs (v1, v2) and associated semantic similarity benchmark

values s,

wv = pretrained word2vec word embedding model

gl = pretrained GloV e word embedding model

wn = WordNet lexical knowledge base

Output: best_measure = the semantic similarity measure that achieves the best correlation to the benchmark values.

1: S ←∅

2: procedure verb_similarity

3:

for each (v1, v2, s) ∈Dverb do

4:

S+= s

5:

w1 ←wv.embedding(v1)

6:

w2 ←wv.embedding(v2)

7:

g1 ←gl.embedding(v1)

8:

g2 ←gl.embedding(v2)

9:

synsets1[syn11...syn1i] ←wn.get_synsets(v1, POS : verb)

▷List of synsets

10:

synsets2[syn21....syn2j] ←wn.get_synsets(v2, POS : verb)

▷List of synsets

11:

for each syn1i ∈synsets1 do

12:

for each syn2j ∈synsets2 do

13:

wup_sim_list[syn1i][syn2j] ←cal_wup(syn1, syn2)

▷wup_similarity

14:

path_sim_list[syn1i][syn2j] ←cal_path(syn1, syn2)

▷path_similarity

15:

lch_sim_list[syn1i][syn2j] ←cal_lch(syn1, syn2)

▷lch_similarity

16:

wup_sim ←max(wup_sim_list[n])

17:

path_sim ←max(path_sim_list[n])

18:

lch_sim ←max(lch_sim_list[n])

19:

word2vec_sim ←wv.similarity(w1, w2)

20:

glove_sim ←gl.similarity(g1, g2)

21:

measure_list+= wup_sim, path_sim, lch_sim, word2vec_sim, glove_sim

22:

for each m ∈measure_list do

23:

cor ←get_pearson_correlation(S, m)

24:

best_measure ←max(cor)

25:

return best_measure

10

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



Algorithm 2 Pass_1: Taxonomic Similarity

Input: Slo_list = List of m learning outcomes from the sending institution.

Rlo_list = List of n learning outcomes from the receiving institution.

Cluster_list = {C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, C6}, List of six clusters initialized with illustrative verbs, such that C1 = {v1, v2...vn} is a

list of n verbs

Output: taxonomic_similarity_grid = A m × n grid containing taxonomic similarity values between sending and receiving

learning outcomes

1: procedure build_taxonomic_similarity_grid

2:

for each (slo) ∈Slo_list do

3:

slo_verbs ←detect_verbs(slo)

▷Find the verbs in the learning outcomes

4:

for each sv ∈slo do

5:

if sv ∈Cluster_list then

6:

B(sv) ←get_index(Ci)

▷If the verb is among the predeﬁned verbs

7:

assign the corresponding cluster id.

8:

else

9:

B(sv) ←get_BestCluster(sv)

▷Assign the cluster id of the best cluster

10:

based on the silhouette width

11:

B(slo) ←max 

B(sv1), ....B(svn)

12:

▷Repeat for learning outcomes from

13:

receiving institution

14:

for each (rlo) ∈Rlo_list do

15:

rlo_verbs ←detect_verbs(rlo)

16:

for each rv ∈rlo do

17:

if rv ∈Cluster_list then

18:

B(rv) ←get_index(Ci)

19:

else

20:

B(rv) ←get_BestCluster(rv)

21:

B(rlo) ←max(B(rv1), ....B(rvn)

22:

▷Calculate taxonomic similarity

23:

for each (slo) ∈Slo_list do

24:

for each (rlo) ∈Rlo_list do

25:

taxonomic_similarity_grid[slo][rlo] ←abs 

B(rlo) −B(slo)

26:

return taxonomic_similarity_grid

Algorithm 3 Pass_2: Semantic Similarity

Input: Slo_list = List of m learning outcomes from the sending institution.

Rlo_list = List of n learning outcomes from the receiving institution.

model = Pretrained and Fine tuned SRoBERTa transformer-based semantic similarity model Output:

semantic_similarity_grid = A m × n grid containing semantic similarity values between sending and receiving learning

outcomes

1: procedure build_semantic_similarity_grid

2:

for each slo, rlo ∈Slo_listRlo_list do

3:

⃗

slo ←model.sentence_vectors(slo)

▷Get vector representation of

4:

learning outcomes

5:

⃗

rlo ←model.sentence_vectors(rlo)

6:

▷Calculate semantic similarity

7:

semantic_similarity_grid[slo][rlo] ←cos( ⃗

slo, ⃗

rlo)

8:

return semantic_similarity_grid

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

11



Algorithm 4 Pass_3: Aggregation

Input: SSG = semantic_similarity_grid, a m × n grid containing semantic similarity values between sending and receiving

learning outcomes

TSG = taxonomic_similarity_grid, a m × n grid containing taxonomic similarity values between sending and receiving

learning outcomes

α = parameter which determines the ratio of two similarity value in the overall similarity

β = value above which two learning outcomes are considered similar

γ = number of learning outcomes with similar counterparts

Output: T C = Final Credit Decision

1: procedure course_level_similarity

2:

for each row, col ∈SSG do

3:

for each row, col ∈TSG do

4:

final_sim ←

 

α × SSG[row, col]+

(1 −α) × TSG[row, col]

5:

if final_sim >= β then

6:

final_similarity_grid[row, column] ←TRUE

7:

else

8:

final_similarity_grid[row, column] ←FALSE

9:

for each row ∈final_similarity_grid do

10:

if Count(TRUE) >= γ then

11:

T C = Y es

12:

else

13:

T C = No

14:

return T C

Table 4. Formula of the semantic similarity distance measures taken into consideration for determining verb similarity

S.No

Semantic Similarity Measure

Formula

1

simpath(t1, t2)

1

1 + min_len(t1, t2)

2

simwup(t1, t2)

2depth(tlcs)

depth(t1) + depth(t2)

3

simlch(t1, t2)

−log min_len(t1,t2)

2×max_depth

Table 5. Performance of the proposed model on varying sim_threshold parameter

S.No.

Human

Annotation

sim_threshold

= 60

sim_threshold

= 65

sim_threshold

= 70

1

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

2

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

3

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

4

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

5

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

6

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

7

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

Agreement

in %

57.14

85.71

57.14

12

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Chandrasekaran et al.



Table 6. Performance of the proposed model on varying impact parameter

S.No.

Human

Annotation

impact

= 20

impact

= 30

impact

= 40

1

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

COMP4121

2

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

COMP5341

3

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

COMP3321

4

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

COMP4321

5

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

COMP3519

6

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

COMP5470

7

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

COMP5471

Agreement

in %

71.42

85.71

57.14

Chandrasekaran et al.

PNAS

|

April 6, 2021

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

13