Retracted papers by Iranian authors:

Causes, journals, time lags, affiliations, collaborations

Ali Ghorbi1*, Mohsen Fazeli-Varzaneh1, Erfan Ghaderi-Azad1,

Marcel Ausloos2, 3, 4, Marcin Kozak5

Ali Ghorbi ORCID: 0000-0003-1411-575X

Mohsen Fazeli-Varzaneh ORCID: 0000-0001-8614-8513

Erfan Ghaderi-Azad ORCID: 0000-0002-8469-0234

Marcel Ausloos ORCID: 0000-0001-9973-0019

Marcin Kozak ORCID: 0000-0001-9653-3108


## 1. Department of Knowledge and Information Science, Faculty of Management, University


of Tehran, Tehran, Iran


## 2. School of Business, University of Leicester, Brookfield, Leicester, LE2 1RQ, United


Kingdom


## 3. GRAPES, rue de la Belle Jardinière, 483/0021, B-4031, Liège Angleur, Belgium.



## 4. Department of Statistics and Econometrics, Bucharest University of Economic Studies,


Calea Dorobantilor 15-17, Bucharest, 010552 Sector 1, Romania


## 5. Department of Journalism, Media and Social Communication, University of Information


Technology and Management in Rzeszów, Sucharskiego 2, 35-225 Rzeszów, Poland

*Corresponding author email: alighorbi73@ut.ac.ir

1




## Abstract


This study aims to analyze 343 retraction notices indexed in the Scopus database, published in

2001–2019, related to scientific articles (co-)written by at least one author affiliated with an

Iranian institution. In order to determine reasons for retractions, we merged this database with

the database from Retraction Watch. The data were analyzed using Excel 2016 and IBM-

SPSS version 24.0, and visualized using VOSviewer software. Most of the retractions were

due to fake peer review (95 retractions) and plagiarism (90). The average time between a

publication and its retraction was 591 days. The maximum time-lag (about 3,000 days)

occurred for papers retracted due to duplicate publications; the minimum time-lag (fewer than

100 days) was for papers retracted due to “unspecified cause” (most of these were conference

papers).

As many as 48 (14%) of the retracted papers were published in two medical journals: Tumor

Biology (25 papers) and Diagnostic Pathology (23 papers). From the institutional point of

view, Islamic Azad University was the inglorious leader, contributing to over one-half

(53.1%) of retracted papers. Among the 343 retraction notices, 64 papers pertained to

international collaborations with researchers from mainly Asian and European countries;

Malaysia having the most retractions (22 papers).

Since most retractions were due to fake peer review and plagiarism, the peer review system

appears to be a weak point of the submission/publication process; if improved, the number of

retractions would likely drop because of increased editorial control.

Keywords: Iran; retraction reasons; plagiarism; fake peer review; unethical behavior.

2




## Introduction


In the 21st century, academia has been faced with various and numerous instances of

misconduct. Many authors try to exploit the academic publishing system in order to publish

articles that would not otherwise be accepted for publication. In that way, they aim to achieve

unearned success for many possible reasons, such as career advancement, obtaining additional

gratification, gaining credibility or respect in scientific society, or simply boosting their self-

image. These days, with millions of authors trying to publish their research and many of them

succeeding, scientists face increased expectations. What twenty years ago constituted a great

achievement in terms of the number of published articles can now be considered barely the

minimum, or even below the minimum “for scientific success”. Thus, publishing ten instead

of five papers a year is a tempting prospect; some scientists eventually surrender to social or

academic pressure and choose an unethical path.

The scientific community had to react to this phenomenon, and it did, both as a group of

individuals and as a community. As examples of individual reactions, we include reviewers,

most of whom now pay much attention to any unethical behavior of the authors of the

manuscripts they review, as well as journal editors and technical staff who guard the quality

of scientific journals. Many scientists also discourage and stigmatize unethical behavior of

their peers.

As examples of community reactions, we can mention conferences, journals and organization

bodies dedicated to ethics in science. Among such bodies, the Committee on Publication

Ethics (COPE) plays a crucial role. A nonprofit organization consisting of editors and

publishers who work to improve the quality of scholarly publishing, COPE creates standards

and definitions, as well as educates and supports editors, publishers and all those involved in

publication ethics.

The review processes as currently organized by journals do not fully control the ethical

quality of publications (Bornmann and Mungra, 2011). One of the tools used to overcome this

issue—albeit a post mortem tool—is article retraction. A published article that later proves to

be unworthy of publication for particularly serious reasons may be retracted. Surely, since this

is a serious tool, it must be used with caution so that innocent people are not affected. COPE

suggests that journal editors should consider whether or not to retract an article in one of the

following four situations: (i) the editors have an evidence that the findings are unreliable,

either as a result of misconduct or honest error; (ii) the same findings have already been

published and this fact was not properly addressed (e.g., by obtaining permission or providing

3



a reference); (iii) the article plagiarises another published document; or (iv) the article is

based upon unethical research (Wager et al., 2009). Based on such COPE guidelines, an

article could be retracted due to “honest errors,” “misrepresentation”, “data manipulation,”

“poor data management” (such as the author being unable to generate data to support his or

her results), “plagiarism” (including self-plagiarism), “duplication of text,” or “failure to

disclose conflicts of interest” (Wager et al., 2009).

It seems that the retraction phenomenon is country-dependent, since some national scientific

environments put more emphasis on quality and others on quantity. When quantity of

scientific output becomes more important than its quality, it seems much easier (and likely

more tempting) to exploit this situation through some form of unethical behavior (like

plagiarism). Recently, Campos-Varela and Ruano-Raviña (2019) analyzed 2013–2016

PubMed-indexed publications in terms of retractions; from their results, it follows that Iran

was the inglorious leader of what we could call the retraction business. Dakhesh and Hamidi

(2020) mentioned various measures that were (recently) taken in Iran to overcome this issue,

and suggested that “It’s obvious that these authors and the two mentioned journals cannot be a

true representative for Iranian researchers”.

Yet, given this escalation of the problem in Iran, this present paper reports studies on the

retraction problem among Iranian-affiliated authors. We do so by examining various aspects

of retracted papers, mainly focusing on who wrote them, where they were published, and why

they were retracted. The knowledge gained from such analyses will hopefully contribute to (i)

the general knowledge of the retraction problem; and (ii) specific knowledge on Iranian

retractions, a particularly important issue given previous results suggesting that Iran might be

the greatest contributor to retractions, something in turn suggesting that Iranian science may

be suffering from a serious issue of unethical behavior.


## Literature review


To set up the frame of the present research and to answer specific research questions, we

outline here the relevant, mostly recent, papers. The literature on retraction is already vast,

and one of the first documents triggering increasing interest in the phenomenon is Stewart and

Feder’s (1987) comment on a problematic paper. The need to study retractions and publish

the results of such research quickly appeared a key for the process of dissemination of

scientific results.

4



A literature survey indicates that retractions constitute a growing problem for science. Wager

and Williams (2011) showed that the tendency for retracting articles increased rapidly in the

1980s. Various pictures of the retraction phenomenon follow from various studies, depending

on the time window, publication source, but also other aspects (Lei and Zhang, 2018). Tang et

al. (2020) found that “China stands out with the fastest retracting speed compared to other

countries.” From Campos-Varela and Ruano-Raviña’s (2019) study, however, it follows that

“the highest proportion of retracted publications corresponded to Iran (15.52 per 10,000),

followed by Egypt and China (11.75 and 8.26 per 10,000).”

Steen (2011) examined 788 retracted articles from 2000 to 2010. He observed that the top five

countries in terms of the number of retracted articles were the United States (260), China (89),

Japan (60), India (50), and England (45). Note that Iran was not among those countries; this is

a different result from that observed in Campos-Varela and Ruano-Raviña (2019) conclusion

about Iran’s contribution to retracted papers. Callaway (2016) stressed that 58 papers by

Iranian researchers were retracted mainly due to authorship manipulation, peer review

manipulation, and plagiarism. Later, Dakhesh and Hamidi (2020), in their comment on

Campos-Varela and Ruano-Raviña’s (2019) paper, stressed that Iran took serious actions

against its authors whose papers had been retracted. This led the authors conclude that

retractions of Iranian papers, although a serious problem in the past, should not constitute a so

serious problem anymore.

Wager and Williams (2011) determined that approximately 0.02% of all publications listed in

Medline from 2005 to 2009 had been retracted. Based on 312 retracted articles from 1988 to

2008, Wager and Williams (2011) concluded that 63% of the retractions were due to the

requests from the authors of these retracted articles. From Vuong’s (2020) study, a different

picture follows: 53% of the retraction notices (for 2046 retracted papers published between

1975 and 2019) are not specifying who initiated the retraction.

Another important aspect of scientometrics research on retractions pertains to reasons behind

retractions. Generally, the causes are divided into three categories: research misconduct,

scientific errors, and moral and/or political reasons (Aspura et al., 2018; Wager and Williams,

2011). For example, Budd et al. (1998) examined 235 retracted articles from 1966 to 1997

indexed in Medline. In their study, retraction reasons included most of all scientific errors (91

papers, 38.7%) and research misconduct (86 papers, 36.5%), but much less frequently

unrepeatable results (38 papers, 16.1%) as well as no clear reason (20 papers, 8.5%). Similar


## results were reported by Wager and Williams (2011), Fang et al. (2012), Grieneisen and


5



Zhang (2012), Ribeiro and Vasconcelos (2018), Dal-Ré and Ayuso (2019), and Elango et al.

(2019). In Chauvin et al.’s (2019) study, the most common reasons for retractions in the field

of emergency medicine were plagiarism (29%) and duplicate publication (11%); similar

observations were made by Elango et al. (2019) for Indian retractions.

Elango et al. (2019) analyzed the types of retracted papers. Out of 239 India-affiliated

retracted articles indexed in Scopus between 2005 and 2018, 82% were published in journals;

the remaining ones were in conference proceedings. Ghorbi (2019) analyzed citations and

thematic classification of retracted papers affiliated to the Middle East countries, and showed

that about half of Iranian retracted papers were categorized in Life Sciences & Biomedicine,

among which most papers were in the Oncology and Pathology sub-categories.

One of the most important aspects related to any unethical behavior pertains to country-wise

differences and international collaborations. One might presume that most retractions should

come from countries whose science is at a low level, but research shows that this is not true:

scientifically strong countries, with diverse and abundant scientific output, tend to have more

retracted publications (Zhang et al., 2019). Ghorbi and Fahimifar (2020) studied the status and

collaboration patterns of all retracted papers indexed in Web of Science during 1997–2018;

they compared institutions and countries based on the absolute number of retracted papers.

With 205 retracted papers, Iran took the 7th place in terms of the number of retracted papers.

However, the Islamic Azad University of Iran was the second institution with the most

retracted papers in the world. From Ghorbi and Fahimifar (2020) study, it follows that indeed,

at least until 2018, Iran was among the countries with a serious retraction problem.

Research objectives

The main question behind this research—which we built based upon the literature and

reasoning presented in the Introduction—is that Iranian science suffers from a serious

retraction problem (as suggested in various sources), but also that the situation has improved

recently (as suggested—or rather hoped—by Dakhesh and Hamidi (2020)).

We wish to emphasize that despite dealing with a sensitive topic related to unethical behavior

of scientists, this research is fully objective and is not politically motivated, partially because

the paper is the result of an international collaboration. The research and the paper aim to

contribute to the global bibliometric and scientometric knowledge by providing partial

knowledge, related to one particular country. This, we hope, will help to improve the behavior

6



of the global scholarly publishing community. If this work addresses one country—The

Islamic Republic of Iran—, it is because frequent results have pointed out that this country

has strongly contributed to the global retraction problem. This particular observation calls for

a detailed analysis of the retraction phenomenon in Iranian science, something that this paper

offers.

Materials and methods

On 20th January 2020, we queried the Scopus database to identify retracted publications using

the search term “retract*”, with an additional country filter, to choose Iran-affiliated retraction

notices that were published from 2001 to 2019. This search strategy, previously used by

Elango et al. (2019) and Aspura et al. (2018) for other countries, yielded a total of 418

retractions. To filter out non-retractions (that is, scientific articles in whose titles a term

“retract*” appeared that were not related to retraction), we checked all these papers, a process

that led us to detect 343 actual retractions. For further analyses, we extracted the data as a

CSV file.

Besides standard summary statistics, we also applied the Modified Collaboration Coefficient

(MCC) (Savanur and Srikanth, 2010), based on the Collaboration Coefficient (de Solla Price

and Beaver, 1966; Ajiferuke et al., 1988), calculated for a particular set of articles as follows:

!!

!

!

!

!

!!!

×

𝑀𝐶𝐶=

!!! 1 −

!

(1)

where 𝑓! is the number of papers with j co-authors, n is the total number of papers published

in the investigated set (e.g., a category or a country), k is the largest number of authors per

paper in the set, and A is the total number of authors in the set.

MCC ranges between 0 and 1; an MCC value close to zero represents a trend toward single-

author articles; a value close to 1 represents a trend toward multi-author articles.

We analyzed Iranian retractions in the following contexts:

-

time lag (Fang et al., 2012);

-

journals (Steen, Casadevall and Fang, 2013; Bornemann-Cimenti, Szilagyi, and

Sandner-Kiesling, 2016; Steen, 2012) and their quality measures, like impact factor

(Fang et al., 2012);

-

the size/level of institution (Stavale et al., 2019); and

7



-

retraction reasons (e.g., Budd et al., 1998; Wager and Williams, 2011; Fang et al.,

2012; Grieneisen and Zhang, 2012; Ribeiro and Vasconcelos, 2018; Dal-Ré and

Ayuso, 2019; Elango et al., 2019; Chauvin et al., 2019), including retractions

requested by the authors themselves (Wager and Williams, 2011).

To study retraction reasons and determine the share of Iranian retractions in global retractions,

we also extracted data from another data source: the Retraction Watch database. The

advantage of this database for this type of analysis is that it already includes reasons behind

retractions. Therefore, all analyses—including ours—of retractions in terms of retraction

reasons based on Retraction Watch are comparable. The Retraction Watch database contains

more (728) Iranian retractions than we found in Scopus (343). Therefore, for a general


## analysis of the share of Iranian retractions in global retractions, we used the whole database


from Retraction Watch. However, to analyze retraction reasons of the 343 retractions we

found in Scopus, we merged these two databases, keeping only those retractions that were

included in both databases. Fortunately, all the retractions we retrieved from Scopus were

included in the Retraction Watch database; in so doing we added reasons to all the 343

retractions found from Scopus.

We independently reviewed these reasons based on the COPE guidelines, and then

categorized the reasons. If any inconsistencies occurred, we resolved them by discussion and

final agreement. This way, we obtained the following eleven categories of retraction reasons:

fake peer review, plagiarism, duplicate publication, authorship problems, scientific error,

publisher error, falsification/fabrication, copyright claims, conflict of interest, unspecified,

and other.


## Data analysis was performed using Excel 2016 and IBM-SPSS version 24.0. To visualize the


international collaboration map, we used VOSviewer.


## Results


Table 1 summarizes the data from the Retraction Watch database, by comparing those for Iran

with those for the whole world; Figure 1 shows the share of Iranian retractions in global

retractions over time (also based on Retraction Watch data). In 2016, Iran encountered quite a

problem with retractions, with as high a share as 14% of all retracted papers in the world

having been affiliated with at least one author from an Iranian institution. Given such a small

8



country in terms of scientific output, this is a huge number. Nonetheless, we notice that this

share dropped to 6% in 2019.

Table 1. Main statistical characteristics of the Retraction Watch database in terms of retracted

papers across 2001–2019 in the world and those having at least one affiliation with the

Islamic Republic of Iran (IRI). Data source: Retraction Watch.

No. of

retractions

Min

Max

Total

Mean

Median

SD

Skewness

Kurtosis

World

33

4,918

18,840

991.6

796

1,197

2.14

4.38

IRI

0

120

728

38.3

29

41.8

0.74

-0.88

16%

Share of Iranian retractions

14%

12%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

Retraction year

Fig 1. The share of retracted Iranian documents in the global number of retracted documents

(2001–2019). Data source: Retraction Watch; the graph is prepared based on all 728 Iranian

retractions found in Retraction Watch.

Iranian science shows a well-known global trend of rapidly increasing publication output,

with more and more Iranian papers being published each year (Figure 2). A naïve simple

linear regression analysis well describes this trend, with the determination coefficient being

equal to  98.1%. Although we cannot extrapolate this trend into the future, it does show that in

the twenty-first century, Iranian science has been facing a rapid development, just like world

science.

9



On one hand, the number of retracted papers by Iranian-affiliated authors has been showing

an increasing trend (Figure 3); on the other hand, this trend had turn overs  in 2010 and 2016,

when the number of retracted Iranian documents was incomparably high. During 2001–2019,

343 Iranian papers were retracted; almost half of them have been retracted in 2010 and 2016.

Many papers that were retracted in 2010 were published during that same year, and some of

those retracted in the next years (more precisely, 66 of the 75 papers published in 2010 were

retracted in that year). The second peak in retracted documents (61) occurred in 2015, one

year after a peak in the number of later-retracted publications (70). This shows that there is

some “not short” time lag between publication and retraction. On average, papers were

retracted 591 days after publication. Conference papers had the shortest time from publication

to retraction. For example, in 2015, 64 of the 65 conference papers were retracted in the same

year of publication, a result explaining the 2015 peak in Figure 3. The yearly number of

documents and the number of retracted papers by Iranian authors showed a significant

correlation (the p-value of 0.004)1, but the Kendall correlation coefficient was rather low (τ =

0.487)—so the significance being also due to the size of the sample (Kozak, 2008).

Interestingly, among the 68 papers retracted in 2010, only three—all published in journals—

were retracted for plagiarism, while the other 65 were conference papers with no specified

retraction reason. As many as 45 of these 65 (69%) retracted conference papers were

published by authors affiliated to the Islamic Azad University2, an institution which had the

greatest contribution to Iranian retractions; this institution was pointed out by Ghorbi and

Fahimifar (2020) as being the second greatest contributor to global retractions.

The retraction peak in 2016 has a different story. Most of these retractions—48 out of 70—

were of papers published in 2013–2016 in two medical journals: Tumor Biology and

Diagnostic Pathology. Note that in Ghorbi’s (2019) research, most retracted Iranian papers

were from Life Sciences & Biomedicine, especially in the fields of Oncology and Pathology.

As Fig.A1 in the Appendix shows, these two journals have faced a high number of

submissions from Iran and published many more papers from Iran than they used to do before

that time. Nonetheless, after the great retraction action in 2016, both journals almost stopped

publishing Iranian research. Worth noticing is that both journals are reputable in their fields,

thereby suggesting that even a reputable journal can be a victim of unethical behavior on a

1 As also noticed by Lei and Zhang (2018), for China, for which τ = 0.84.

2 Note that "Islamic Azad University" has many branches in different cities, like the Islamic Azad University of

Isfahan, the Islamic Azad University of Mashhad, the Islamic Azad University of Tabriz, etc. Scopus, however,

groups all of them into one institution, the Islamic Azad University, which makes it a large university.

10



large scale. Also, note that both Tumor Biology and Diagnostic Pathology are open-access

journals; this may have induced authors of these articles to make results more quickly visible,

but whether open-access journals attract unethical behavior more than other journals needs

further additional research, on a wider scale than the present study.

70

Milliers

R² = 0,98094

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Fig. 2. The total number of documents published by Iranian authors in 2001–2019, with a

linear regression line showing a clear trend across this period (based on the average of over 30

thousand papers per year). Data source: Scopus.

11



80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

Publication year

Retraction year

Fig 3. Retracted Iranian papers during 2001–2019: The dashed line shows the number

of papers retracted a given year, and the solid lines shows the number of papers published in a

given year (limited to retracted papers). Data source: Scopus.

Table 2. Source type and document type of the 343 Iranian retractions. Data source: Scopus.

Source

Document type#

Count

Share

Erratum

219

63.8

Article

28

8.2

Retracted

13

3.8

Journals

(264 papers in 138 journals)

Review

2

0.6

Editorial

1

0.3

Note

1

0.3

Conference Proceedings

Paper

79

23.0

(79 papers in 24 proceedings)

# “Document type” here represents the type of document of a retraction notice, as

indexed by Scopus.

12



Fig 4. The share of reasons of Iranian retractions. Data source: Retraction Watch; the data

include the 343 retractions from Scopus, for which retraction reasons were retrieved from

Retraction Watch.

Most retracted papers (264) were published in journals—as many as 138 journals (Table 2).

For 219 papers, Scopus classified retractions notices as errata, although “this word was not

used in the retraction notices themselves,” as already noticed by Elango et al. (2019).

Over half of the journal articles were retracted because of a double cause: “fake peer review”

and “plagiarism” (Figure 4). Few were published in conference proceedings, and none of

these retractions provided a reason.

Table 3 summarizes retraction reasons (retrieved from Retraction Watch) for the 343

documents. Since some papers were retracted for more than one reason, the reasons sum up to

433; thus the sum of their share is over 100%. The most common retraction reasons were fake

peer review (95) and plagiarism (90). Eighty-four retractions did not specify the reasons.

Table 3 also reports the modified collaboration coefficient (MCC). The whole collection had

MCC=0.61. Note that the papers retracted due to authorship problems and fake peer review(s)

had higher MCC values than those retracted due to plagiarism and duplicate publication.

These results should not come as a surprise, since plagiarism and self-plagiarism are less

likely to be conducted by large groups of co-authors. Note that out of the 343 retracted Iranian

papers, only 36 were written by a single author and 96 by two co-authors.

13



Table 3. Main reasons for retractions. <P-R> is the average time (in days) between

publication date and retraction date; MCC is the Modified Collaboration Coefficient. Share is

calculated as the ratio to the total number of retracted papers (343). Data source: Retraction

Watch; the data include the 343 retractions from Scopus, for which retraction reasons were

retrieved from Retraction Watch.

Reason for retraction

Count

<P-R>

MCC

Share

Fake peer review

95

669

0.72

27.7

Plagiarism

90

672

0.62

26.2

Unspecified

84

129

0.53

24.5

Duplicate publication

64

1057

0.58

18.7

Authorship problems

32

813

0.72

9.3

Scientific error

31

745

0.70

9.0

Other

23

262

0.50

6.7

Publisher error

7

754

– #

2.0

Falsification/fabrication

4

476

–

1.2

Copyright claims

2

932

–

0.6

Conflict of interest

1

276

–

0.3

# We did not determine MCC for sets with fewer than 10 papers, since MCC has limited

interpretation in such instances.

14



Table 4. Top 10 journals with most retractions by Iran-affiliated authors. Data source: Scopus.

CiteScore

<P-R>

(Days)

Count

Share

SNIP

Journals

Subject Area

SJR

Biochemistry, Genetics and

Molecular Biology: Cancer

Tumor Biology

25

7.29

377

3.21

1.057

0.818

Research

Medicine: Pathology and

Forensic Medicine; Medicine:

Diagnostic Pathology

23

6.71

747

1.98

0.804

0.864

Histology

Progress in Organic

Coatings

12

3.50

87

3.7

0.822

1.348

Chemical Engineering;

Chemistry; Materials Science

International Journal

of Hydrogen Energy

10

2.92

285

4.16

1.1

1.128

Energy; Physics and

Astronomy

Neural Computing and

Applications

8

2.33

443

4.2

0.637

1.481

Computer Science

Energy and Buildings

5

1.46

2990

5.36

1.934

1.826

Engineering

Materials Science;

Engineering; Physics and

Materials Science and

Engineering A

5

1.46

663

4.62

1.778

2.015

Astronomy

Agricultural and Biological

Sciences; Biochemistry,

Biochemical Genetics

4

1.17

362

1.6

0.51

0.658

Genetics and Molecular

Biology

Communications in

Nonlinear Science and

4

1.17

1291

4.03

1.326

1.805

Mathematics

Numerical Simulation

Journal of Crystal

Growth

4

1.17

915

1.6

0.515

0.869

Physics and Astronomy;

Chemistry; Materials Science

The other 128

journals

164

48.81

745

-

-

-

-

Conference papers

79

23.03

80

-

-

-

-

Total

343

100

592

-

-

-

-

We have already discussed the issue with Tumor Biology and Diagnostic Pathology, here

above; Table 4 which lists the top 10 journals when most retractions are by Iran-affiliated

authors, confirms that these two journals contains papers, which are retracted by many

authors from Iranian institutions. Among the top ten journals from Table 4, Progress in

Organic Coatings had the fastest retraction times (the mean time between publication and

retraction being 87 days). This is an amazing result, given the overall mean of almost 600

15



days. Notice that for Energy and Buildings, it takes almost three thousand days from

publication to retraction day; this journal had the highest CiteScore (5.36) and SJR (1.934)

among the top 10 journals with most retractions. (The highest SNIP belonged to Materials

Science and Engineering A.)

Table 5. Top 10 institutions with most retractions, ordered decreasingly by their share

(calculated as the ratio of the number of retracted papers affiliated to the mentioned institution

with respect to all retracted papers, i.e., 343). Data source: Scopus.

Main reasons for retraction

No. of retracted papers (RP)

No. of documents (TD)

Duplicate publication (%)

Authorship problems (%)

Fake peer review (%)

Unspecified (%)

RP/TD

RP

Plagiarism (%)

Affiliations

(%)

Share

Islamic Azad University

78,789

182

0.23

53.1

36.8

24.1

29.1

14.8

9.3

University of Tehran

56,421

49

0.09

14.3

51

46.9

4

12.2

34.6

Baqiyatallah University

of Medical Sciences

6,080

29

0.48

8.5

96.5

31

3.4

6.8

31

AJA University of

Medical Sciences

1,230

25

2.03

7.3

88

24

4

8

28

Tehran University of

Medical Sciences

49,346

22

0.04

6.4

45.4

36.6

4.5

22.7

31

Ilam University

1,749

15

0.86

4.4

93.3

60

0

6.6

60

Kurdistan University of

Medical Sciences

2,072

15

0.72

4.4

86.6

40

0

6.6

33.3

Urmia University

7,297

13

0.18

3.8

100

53.8

0

0

38.4

Shahid Beheshti

University of Medical

25,808

13

0.05

3.8

61

30.7

0

23

15.3

Sciences

Ferdowsi University of

Mashhad

17,809

12

0.07

3.5

16.6

58.3

8.3

8.3

16.6

In Table 5, we list the top 10 institutions with most retractions, in a decreasing order as

measured by their share, calculated as the ratio between the number of retracted papers by

16



authors affiliated to the mentioned institution and the total number of retracted papers, i.e.,


## 343. Five of the top 10 institutions with most retractions are medical universities (see also


Table 3), a result that does not come as a surprise, given that Ghorbi (2019) already pointed

out  that about half of the retracted Iranian papers dealt with Life Sciences & Biomedicine.

Over half (182) of the hereby examined retracted papers were published by authors affiliated

with the Islamic Azad University (Table 5). This university has many branches in Iranian

cities, and considered together they create a large university; hence so many retracted papers

affiliated to it. Among the top 10 listed institutions, however, the share of retracted articles in

all articles published by this university is not truly large (0.23%). Other institutions with many

retractions include the University of Tehran (49) and Baqiyatallah University of Medical

Sciences (29).

In terms of the share of retracted papers to the total number of documents from the institution,

AJA University of Medical Sciences stands out, with over 2% of all papers having been

retracted—a very high number, even compared to the other top ten institutions (Table 5). The

next institutions in this regard are  Ilam University (0.86%) and Kurdistan University of

Medical Sciences (0.72%). The main retraction reasons of papers from these universities were

fake peer review, plagiarism, and authorship problems. Almost all retracted papers from

Urmia University, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, and Ilam University were

retracted due to fake peer review; papers from Ilam University, Ferdowsi University of

Mashhad, and Urmia University were often retracted due to plagiarism.

Next, consider Figure 6 on which we visualize the collaboration network of the authors of the

retracted Iranian papers. Overall, researchers from 27 countries coauthored the retracted

Iranian publications; notice that for readability, the graph includes only those countries that

shared at least three retracted publications with Iranian authors; without this limitation, the

network would include 27 countries. The size of a node size indicates the corresponding

collaboration’s frequency, while node colors represent continents, yellow representing Asian

countries, blue representing European countries, red representing North American countries,

and green representing South American countries. Most of the collaborations were with

colleagues from Asian and European countries; Malaysia (22 shared publications with Iran)

being the greatest foreign contributor to the retracted Iranian papers.

Hayati and Didegah (2010) stated that “Iranian researchers have had scientific collaboration

with 115 countries, […] between 1998 and 2007. […]. Iran’s main partners were the USA,

Canada, and UK.” Note that although Iranian researchers cooperate a lot with their colleagues

17



from the USA, Canada, and the UK, these three countries did not appear as key players in a

collaboration leading to retraction.

Fig 6. International collaboration network, showing countries that were affiliated in at least

three retracted Iranian papers. Without this limitation, the network would include 27

countries. Data source: Scopus.


## Discussion and Conclusion


In the twenty-first century, science has been developing very quickly, an indication of the

overall development of society and humanity in general. Unfortunately, this does not come

without cost: researchers are expected to publish much more than two or three decades ago.

Working under such an academic pressure, some researchers decide to choose an easy path to

publication, one that is based on unethical behavior. Thus, an increasing number of studies

have been recognized as publishing false or unethically obtained data. Plagiarism is still a

common problem.

These are among the reasons behind the rapidly increasing number of retracted works over the

past 20 years (Van Noorden, 2011; Steen et al., 2013). On one hand, this increase in

retractions can be considered as good news: more and more unethical papers are being caught;

but on the other hand, it is bad news: more and more unethical papers are being published. It

18



is no wonder, then, that many researchers have studied retractions; given the importance of

the topic—for science and its development, the scientific community, and society in

general—we should pay even more attention to this problem (Van Noorden, 2011; Wager,

2015).

The issue of retractions is difficult to study for various reasons, one of them being the vague

meaning of the phenomenon. Take plagiarism; surely, it is wrong, and no one will disagree.

Now take retraction; retraction is a tool against wrong behavior, so it is actually a positive

aspect of the research field features, -  although most people will likely have negative

thoughts about the phenomenon, as it is closely related to plagiarism and unethical behavior.

From a general perspective, an increasing—and already large—number of retractions

indicates that there is something significantly wrong with the dissemination of scientific

research. In many cases, there are strong reasons to believe that the authors of these articles

behaved in an unethical way, and so the articles should not have been published at all. Thus,

unfortunately, the retraction phenomenon poses a challenging topic to study, since the number

of retractions is in fact a reflection of three confounded factors: committed unethical behavior,

caught unethical behavior, and false-positive unethical behavior. Not caught, unethical

behavior will not lead to a retraction. Sometimes there will be false positives, that is, retracted

articles that should not have been retracted. Of course, there are still published articles


## resulting directly from unethical behavior.


We want to stress how difficult it is to analyze the retraction phenomenon. A linear approach,

reflected by an overly simplified method in which the number of retractions is considered to

be a direct measure of unethical behavior, can lead to unfair or ambiguous conclusions. The

number of retractions, thus, must be considered within a wider context, and in a more indirect

way than the linear approach. That is why we have tried to include as much context and focus

as possible in our analyses.

We stress that several articles might have gone unnoticed had they not been retracted, but

others have attracted extraordinary attention due to their contents before their retraction,

something that might have led to additional problems, including societal ones. For example,

Wakefield et al. (1998) claimed that combined vaccines made from measles, mumps, and

rubella vaccine would cause autism in children. All of that later was proved to be untrue; The

Lancet retracted this article—and yet, many people worldwide still believe that such

vaccinations can cause autism in children; consequently, the vaccination rate of children in

the UK and the USA decreased. In another case, two articles on the subject of human stem

19



cells published in Science were retracted because the authors fabricated the data (Hwang et

al., 2004, 2005). A well-known case about a change in attitudes toward same-sex marriage,

also published in Science, was retracted because one author failed to provide raw research


## data (LaCour and Green, 2014). These examples prove that retraction is not efficient:


although retracted papers are not considered valid research, their results can outlive their

publication, sometimes with long-term effects. Thus, although retraction remains an important

tool against unethical behavior, it should be considered as a last resort measure, not the main

one.

From the above results, the following picture emerges. Science in the Islamic Republic of Iran

suffers from unethical behavior, but this phenomenon, recognized as serious several years

ago, seems to be on the decline in recent years. We are aware that analyzing retractions does

not mean analyzing all unethical behavior in science—but only the set of behaviors that have

been discovered. Moreover, one retracted paper can lead to serious social consequences, such

as the reduction in vaccination rates, as discussed above; other retractions can be of lesser

significance, and can even occur due to a request from the authors of the retracted paper for

unintentional errors.

Thus, an important aspect of retraction is why a paper was retracted. However detailed the

categorization of retractions is, it will unlikely offer sufficient granularity to easily aggregate

these retractions: some causes are indeed “comparable”, but others may deserve to be treated

in a different or unique way. Imagine that some authors do not provide the data from their

article because no data existed. Thereafter, imagine other authors may not have been able to

provide the data from their article because of an accident with a computer on which the data

were stored. Are the two situations  similar? They definitely are different—which does not

mean that the journal could not or should not retract both articles, in particular because no one

besides the authors actually knows the truth. It is difficult to imagine the former authors to

say, “Sorry, but we falsified the data.” They would rather choose the latter explanation, just

like the latter authors. As we see, studying retractions and other types of unethical behavior in

any discipline is complex. When using general data, like those we used here, we have to keep

this lack of unquestionable truth in mind when interpreting data on retractions.

Here, we have studied Iranian retractions because, in the past, the Islamic Republic of Iran has

been pointed out as one of the greatest contributors to the retraction fields. Our study confirms

that Iran indeed plays a role, but also that this role seems less drastic than it was several years

ago. This may be due to the actions, including degradation in academic rankings and even

20



expulsion from research centers, that were taken in the country after reports of serious

unethical behavior by Iranian scientific authors, as described by Dakhesh and Hamidi (2020).

The study covered works by authors affiliated with at least one Iranian institution, published

over 2001–2019. Over this period, the number of retracted articles by Iranian authors

increased during 2001–2019. This trend was interrupted by two peaks, in 2010 and 2016. In

fact, those two years contributed to over 50% of all the retractions from the period studied.

Thus, the total number of documents was steadily growing, but the number of retracted papers

rather grew erratically. If confirmed in the following years, this trend may mean that the

actions which the Islamic Republic of Iran took against unethical scientists have been fruitful.

The mean time from publication to retraction was almost 600 days (about 20 months); the

median was 338 days. It was much shorter for conference papers than for journal papers.

Sometimes retractions happened very quickly (less than 100 days from publication), but

sometimes they occurred after several years. For example, it took over eight years to retract

(five) publications from Energy and Buildings. Surprising at first glance, this observation is

‘’understandable’’ because the papers are duplicate publications. This example of delayed

resolution indicates that unethical behavior can be discovered long after the act.

Our results show that none of the retractions from conference papers provided a reason for the

retraction. Unfortunately, our data analysis does  not give any indication as to why these

reasons were not provided—but given the scale of the retractions, it seems that one should be

worrying why retraction reasons from conference proceedings were not specified. This is

something that should be stressed—and changed. Journals, on the other hand, often publish

reasons behind retractions, often publishing an erratum to the retracted paper.

In our sample, 264 retracted papers were published in 138 different journals; the remaining 79

papers were published in conference proceedings. However, about 30% of the retracted

Iranian articles were published in 10 journals, and 14% of the retracted articles were

published in Tumor Biology and Diagnostic Pathology, both being medical journals. This

shows that large-scale retractions happen. This also shows that the scholarly publishing

community is often brave enough to take serious actions against unethical behavior.

In an ideal world, no article would need retraction because no article would deserve it. As we

do not live in such a world, the scientific community is not perfect. So, As scientists, we need

to react when an article presents such problems. We must remember that although editors are

among the people responsible for the quality of the papers published in a particular journal,

21



the current peer review system is strongly based upon scientists who serve as reviewers. The

quality of reviewers is a known challenging criterion of the peer review process (Ausloos et

al., 2016). So if an article has actual ‘’errors’’, it is often due to how the system works—

sometimes an editor will fail, sometimes a reviewer. The system is far from perfect, as the

growing retraction phenomenon confirms. It takes courage to retract multiple articles from

one journal, and the size and reputation of the journal does not matter. Often it may be much

easier to ignore the problem. The editors and publishers who decide to act, particularly when

they retract many papers simultaneously, deserve the highest praise.

In our results, among the reasons for the retracted articles, those related to peer review seem

to play the most important role, with fake peer review being the most frequent retraction

reason, followed by plagiarism. This part of our results is not consistent with the research of

Ribeiro and Vasconcelos (2018), Samp et al. (2012), Fanelli (2009), and Steen (2011), who

identified “other reasons” as the most common reason for retraction—although it should be

noted that this term, “other reasons”,  does not explain the actual reasons. However, we are

not the only ones to indicate plagiarism as an important retraction reason; see Chauvin et al.

(2019), Elango et al. (2019), and Rubbo et al. (2019).

The analysis of institutions resulted in the Islamic Azad University as that which contributed

most to Iranian retractions. Ghorbi and Fahimifar (2020) reported the same observation.

However, since researchers affiliated to this (huge) university publish much, this result is

somewhat expected. Such a raw-data analysis can be misleading; thus, we normalized the data

by calculating the percentage of retracted papers to all papers published from the institution.

After this normalization, the Islamic Azad University, with only 0.25% of all articles being

retracted, was no longer the most often retracted Iranian institution; it is replaced by AJA

University of Medical Sciences. The raw number of 25 retracted articles from the latter

university perhaps does not draw attention, but the share of these 25 articles in all the articles

from this university does— over 2%.

Out of the 343 retracted papers, only 64 resulted from cooperation with colleagues affiliated

with institutions from other countries. (Note that this does not mean that they were not

Iranian, since we did not study their nationalities, but only affiliations.) Among those 64

papers, most were affiliated with Asian and European countries, with Malaysia having the

largest share. This goes against the presumably intuitive expectation as well as the findings by

Elango et al. (2019) and Steen (2011), in which studies in collaboration with colleagues from

the USA were predominant.

22



All in all, the results suggest that fake peer review plays a pivotal role in the retractions of

Iranian articles, affiliated not only with lesser known but also with the most prestigious

Iranian scientific institutions, and published in quite reputable international journals. This

being the case, the peer review system emerges as the most important measure of the fight

against unethical behavior, but also as the most susceptible measure to failure. The scholarly

publishing community has been using this system for decades, but what worked 30 years ago

does not necessarily work now, when the scientific community is working under completely

different levels of competition, expectations, and the resulting pressure to publish. So, the

increasing trend in retractions does suggest that something must be changed. New peer review

systems, which we can see applied in various (although still not numerous) journals, will

perhaps offer a solution; but still, we are not there.

In terms of retractions of Iranian publications, we are seeing a gradual improvement.

Although this country has strongly contributed to overall global retractions, the most recent

years have shown an improvement. Of course, we still face an increasing number of

retractions of Iranian papers, but this trend is not as steep, and it seems that Iran does not

stand out anymore. Two previous years (2010 and 2016) were significantly bad in this regard,

with so the most retracted papers. We have to hope that in the following years the situation

will stabilize and even improve.

Limitations

As with any study, ours has some limitations. They include the following phenomena and

issues.

Lacking of justification for retractions

Some retractions did not provide any justification. None of the retracted conference papers

provided a reason. This lack of transparency in retraction reasons hinders the analysis of this

important aspect of the phenomenon. Unfortunately, this limitation cannot be overcome in

such studies as ours. To study this aspect of retractions, a more in-depth qualitative study is

needed. It could, for example, include interviews with the editors who retracted some articles

(like a set of conference proceedings) but did not provide the reasons behind this decision.

Lack of information on those responsible for unethical behavior

23



It is not possible to determine with certainty which among the authors of a retracted paper

were involved in misconduct resulting in the article retraction. This issue also calls for a

dedicated qualitative study, but this time among the authors of retracted papers. This is a very

interesting topic, because it is possible that some of the authors of retracted papers were not

aware of the unethical behavior of others. Such knowledge could help gain additional

knowledge about unethical behavior in science, which could help in future efforts at

prevention. Also, it could help scientists learn how to avoid being victims of unethical

behaviors by their co-authors.

That said, this topic is extremely difficult to study, and the responses one would get from

participants would be extremely difficult to verify. Hence, such a study could employ


## methods used in survey sampling to study sensitive data.


Retraction weight

As discussed above, two retractions with the same reason do not necessarily bear the same

ethical weight. A quantitative study like ours equalizes all retractions that were assigned a

particular reason, an approach that can miss important differences between retractions. One

author might have done something wrong intentionally—which makes it unethical—while

another might have made an accidental error—which means the behavior was not unethical.

Again, studying this topic calls for a qualitative study of what has happened in particular

retractions, which could require investigating each of the situations that led to the retractions

studied.

Limitations of data sources

An obvious but unavoidable limitation are the data sources themselves. Search engines can

provide inconsistent results (Aspura et al., 2018). We have examined data based on Scopus

and Retraction Watch. These two different data sources do not offer directly comparable data;

on the other hand, studying two or more data sources can help to draw a more representative

picture of the phenomenon.

24



Future research direction

A study of retracted papers is complex and draws a wide picture of the phenomenon, in

particular of Iranian retractions, but by no means does it end the research objectives. In

addition to the various ideas presented above in the limitations, further research can be related

to citations of retracted articles. Another line of research can compare retracted and non-

retracted papers in terms of citations, MCC, international collaboration, etc.

An interesting topic is related to research and ethical guidelines in scientific institutions; in

particular, those related to scientific misconduct, the obligations authors must obey when

conducting research, and how offenders would be and have been treated based on these

guidelines. Such a study, when correlated with retractions (and other types of punishment

after misconduct) from these organizations, could offer insights into whether such guidelines

are effective. Of course, it would be also interesting to study whether scientific institutions

that have such rules obey them.

Studies based on quantitative data offer a lot of information, but this information is limited to

what is present in the data. Particularly interesting and valuable research would be to

determine the understanding and intentions of authors whose papers were retracted. What did

you really do, and how serious was it? Why did you do it? Do you consider yourself a

scientific criminal? Would you do it again? How did it affect your career? Do you regret this?

Such a qualitative study could provide a world of new knowledge on unethical behavior,

retractions, and scientists.

25




## Appendix


As discussed in the Results section, in 2016, Tumor Biology and Diagnostic Pathology

retracted many Iranian papers. The figure below shows the number of Iranian papers these

two journals published in 2004–2020.

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2009

2011

2012

2019

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2010

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2020

Diagnostic Pathology

Tumor Biology

Fig A1. The number of Iranian publications published by Diagnostic Pathology and Tumor Biology. Data

source: Scopus

26




## References


Ajiferuke, I., Burell, Q., & Tague, J. (1988). Collaborative coefficient: A single measure of the degree of

collaboration in research. Scientometrics, 14(5-6), 421-433, doi: 10.1007/bf02017100.

Aspura, M. Y. I., Noorhidawati, A., & Abrizah, A. (2018). An analysis of Malaysian retracted papers:

Misconduct or mistakes? Scientometrics, 115(3), 1315-1328, doi: 10.1007/s11192-018-2720-z .

Ausloos, M., Nedic, O., & Dekanski, A. (2016). Day of the week effect in paper submission/acceptance/rejection

to/in/by peer review journals. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 456, 197-203, doi:

10.1016/j.physa.2016.03.032.

Bornmann, L., & Mungra, P. (2011). Improving peer review in scholarly journals. European Science Editing,

37(2), 41-43.

Bornemann-Cimenti, H., Szilagyi, I. S., & Sandner-Kiesling, A. (2016). Perpetuation of Retracted Publications

Using the Example of the Scott S. Reuben Case: Incidences, Reasons and Possible Improvements.

Science and Engineering Ethics, 22(4), 1063-1072.

Budd, J. M., Sievert, M. E., & Schultz, T. R. (1998). Phenomena of retraction - Reasons for retraction and

citations to the publications. Jama-Journal of the American Medical Association, 280(3), 296-297, doi:

10.1001/jama.280.3.296.

Callaway E. (2016). Publisher pulls 58 articles by Iranian scientists over authorship manipulation. Nature.

(Accessed 01/15/2019.) Available at: https://www.nature.com/news/publisher-pulls-58-articles-by-

iranian-scientists-over-authorship-manipulation-1.20916.

Campos-Varela, I., & Ruano-Raviña, A. (2019). Misconduct as the main cause for retraction. A descriptive study

of

retracted

publications

and

their

authors.

Gaceta

Sanitaria,

33,

356-360,

doi:

10.1016/j.gaceta.2018.01.009.

Chauvin, A., De Villelongue, C., Pateron, D., & Yordanov, Y. (2019). A systematic review of retracted

publications in emergency medicine. European Journal of Emergency Medicine, 26(1), 19-23, doi:

10.1097/mej.0000000000000491.

Dakhesh, S., & Hamidi, A. (2020). Scientific misconduct and Iranian scientists. Gaceta Sanitaria, 33, 598-598,

doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2019.02.003.

Dal-Ré, R., & Ayuso, C. (2019). Reasons for and time to retraction of genetics articles published between 1970

and 2018. Journal of Medical Genetics, 56, 734-740,  doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106137.

De Solla Price, D. J., & Beaver, D. (1966). Collaboration in an invisible college. American Psychologist, 21(11),

1011–1018. doi.org/10.1037/h0024051

Elango, B., Kozak, M., & Rajendran, P. (2019). Analysis of retractions in Indian science. Scientometrics, 119(2),

1081-1094, doi: 10.1007/s11192-019-03079-y.

Fanelli, D. (2009). How Many Scientists Fabricate and Falsify Research? A Systematic Review and Meta-


## Analysis of Survey Data. PLoS ONE, 4(5), e5738, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005738.


Fang, F. C., Steen, R. G., & Casadevall, A. (2012). Misconduct accounts for the majority of retracted scientific

publications. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,

109(42), 17028-17033, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1212247109.

Ghorbi, A. (2019). Examine the aspects of research retraction and provide guidelines for identifying unreliable

publications.

(Master's

thesis),

University

of

Tehran,

Tehran,

Iran.

https://

thesis2.ut.ac.ir/thesis/UTCatalog/UTThesis/Forms/ThesisBrief.aspx?thesisID=d26eb04f-7aa6-4217-

833b-efb057f16db8

Ghorbi, A., Fahimifar, S. (2020). Aspects and Collaboration Patterns of Retracted Papers as Evidence of

Research Misconduct in Iran and Foreign countries. Journal of Scientometrics, 6(11), 149-172. doi:

10.22070/rsci.2019.4392.1287.

Grieneisen, M. L., & Zhang, M. (2012). A Comprehensive Survey of Retracted Articles from the Scholarly

Literature. PLoS ONE, 7(10), e44118, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044118.

Hayati, Z., & Didegah, F. (2010). International scientific collaboration among Iranian researchers during 1998-


## 2007. Library Hi Tech, 28(3), 433-446, doi: 10.1108/07378831011076675.


Kozak, M. (2008). Correlation coefficient and the fallacy of statistical hypothesis testing. Current Science, 95(9),

1121-1122.

Lei, L., & Zhang, Y. (2018). Lack of Improvement in Scientific Integrity: An Analysis of WoS Retractions by

Chinese Researchers (1997–2016). Journal of Science and Engineering Ethics, 24(5), 1409-1420, doi:

Ribeiro, M. D., & Vasconcelos, S. M. R. (2018). Retractions covered by Retraction Watch in the 2013–2015

period: prevalence for the most productive countries. Scientometrics, 29(8), 719-734, doi:

10.1007/s11192-017-2621-6.

Rubbo, P., Helmann, C. L., dos Santos, C. B., & Pilatti, L. A. (2019). Retractions in the Engineering Field: A

Study on the Web of Science Database. Ethics and Behavior, 29(2), 141-155, doi:

10.1080/10508422.2017.1390667.

27



Samp, J. C., Schumock, G. T., & Pickard, A. S. (2012). Retracted Publications in the Drug Literature.

Pharmacotherapy, 32(7), 586-595, doi: 10.1002/j.1875-9114.2012.01100.x.

Savanur, K., & Srikanth, R. (2010). Modified collaborative coefficient: A new measure for quantifying the

degree of research collaboration. Scientometrics, 84(2), 365-371, doi: 10.1007/s11192-009-0100-4.

Stavale, R., Ferreira, G. I., Galvão, J. A. M., Zicker, F., Novaes, M. R. C. G., de Oliveira, C. M., & Guilhem, D.

(2019). Research misconduct in health and life sciences research: A systematic review of retracted

literature from Brazilian institutions. PloS one, 14(4), e0214272, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214272.

Steen, R. G. (2011). Retractions in the scientific literature: is the incidence of research fraud increasing? Journal

of Medical Ethics, 37, 249-253, doi: 10.1136/jme.2010.040923.

Steen, R. G., Casadevall, A., & Fang, F. C. (2013). Why Has the Number of Scientific Retractions Increased?

PLoS ONE, 8, e68397, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068397.

Steen, R. G. (2012). Retractions in the medical literature: how can patients be protected from risk?. Journal of

medical ethics, 38(4), 228-232.

Stewart, W. W., & Feder, N. (1987). The integrity of the scientiﬁc literature. Nature, 325, 207-214.

Tang, L., Hu, G., Sui, Y., Yang, Y., & Cao, C. (2020). Retraction: The “Other Face” of Research Collaboration?.

Science and Engineering Ethics, 26, 1681-1708, doi: 10.1007/s11948-020-00209-1.

Van Noorden, R. (2011). Science publishing: The trouble with retractions. Nature, 478(7367), 26-28, doi:

10.1038/478026a.

Vuong, Q. H. (2020). The limitations of retraction notices and the heroic acts of authors who correct the

scholarly record: An analysis of retractions of papers published from 1975 to 2019. Learned Publishing,

33(2), 119-130, doi: 10.1002/leap.1282.

Wager, E. (2015). Why are retractions so difficult? Science Editing, 2(1), 32-34, doi: 10.6087/kcse.34.

Wager, E., Barbour, V., Yentis, S., & Kleinert, S., (2009). Retractions: Guidance from the Committee on

Publication Ethics (COPE). Croatian Medical Journal, 50(6), 532–535, doi: 10.3325/cmj.2009.50.532.

Wager, E., & Williams, P. (2011). Why and how do journals retract articles? An analysis of Medline retractions

1988-2008. Journal of Medical Ethics, 37(9), 567-570, doi: 10.1136/jme.2010.040964.

Zhang, C., Ding, K., & Liu, Z. (2019). Informetric Analysis on the International Retracted Publication Based on

the Web of Science Database. Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, 376 (),

576-585, doi: 10.2991/sschd-19.2019.100.

28




## References to retracted papers


Hwang, W. S., Roh, S. I., Lee, B. C., Kang, S. K., Kwon, D. K., Kim, S., et al. (2005). Patient-specific

embryonic stem cells derived from human SCNT blastocysts. Science, 308(5729), 1777-1783, doi:

10.1126/science.1112286.

Hwang, W. S., Ryu, Y. J., Park, J. H., Park, E. S., Lee, E. G., Koo, J. M., ... & Moon, S. Y. (2004). Evidence of a

pluripotent human embryonic stem cell line derived from a cloned blastocyst. Science, 303(5664),

1669-1674.

LaCour, M. J., & Green, D. P. (2014). When contact changes minds: An experiment on transmission of support

for gay equality. Science, 346(6215), 1366-1369, doi: 10.1126/science.1256151

Wakefield, A. J., Murch, S. H., Anthony, A., Linnell, J., Casson, D. M., Malik, M., et al. (1998). Ileal-lymphoid-

nodular hyperplasia, non-specific colitis, and pervasive developmental disorder in children. Lancet,

351(9103), 637-641, doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(97)11096-0.

29