International Journal of Information Science and Management

Vol. 20, No. 1, 2022, 319-333

Original Research                          Production Copy

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of Retracted Papers Citations on

Previous and Subsequent Published Papers: A Study of the Web of Science Database

Sepideh Fahimifar

Assistant prof., Department of Information and

Ali Ghorbi

Master of Scientometrics, Faculty of Management,

Knowledge Science, Faculty of Management,

University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran

Corresponding Author: sfahimifar@ut.ac.ir

ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5182-9159

alighorbi73@ut.ac.ir

ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1411-575X

Marcel Ausloos

School of Business, University of Leicester, Brookfield, Leicester, United Kingdom

GRAPES, Liege Angleur, Belgium

Department of Statistics and Econometrics, Bucharest University of Economic Studies,

Calea Dorobantilor, Bucharest, Romania

marcel.ausloos@uliege.be

ORCID iD; https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9973-0019



Received: 25 December 2020

Accepted: 17 April 2021


## Abstract


The present research attempts to identify the impact of retracted papers on previous

or subsequent papers. We consider the 5693 retracted papers from 1975 to 2020

indexed in the Web of Science database based on bibliometric methods. We use

HistCite, Excel, and SPSS software as technical means. The findings suggest a

significant difference between the average number of retracted and unretracted

papers when cited in retracted papers. Furthermore, there is a significant difference

between the average number of unretracted and retracted papers citing retracted

papers. The reasons for the retraction of an article may not be the previous

retracted papers, yet unretracted papers may be retracted later because of referring

to (many) retracted papers. It is deduced that proprietors of citation databases

should carefully focus on these papers by checking references to each new paper

citing previously retracted papers.



Keywords: Publication Ethics, Retracted Paper, WoS, Unretracted Paper, Citation.


## Introduction


Scholarly journal publications continue to mark the state of progress within a research

community (Shuai, Rollins, Moulinier, Custis, Edmunds & Schilder, 2017). However,

publishing an academic paper sometimes deviates from its original path. It ends in retraction,

the most serious stigma in scientific research (Chen, Hu, Milbank & Schultz, 2013) beside

coercive citations leading to anomalous measures of research quality (Herteliu, Ausloos,



320

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

Ileanu, Rotundo & Andrei, 2017) and plagiarism (Sharma & Singh, 2011). Retraction is a

public notice that an article should be withdrawn because of errors or unsubstantiated data.

Rather alarmingly, the number of retracted papers has significantly increased (He, 2013)

recently. Studying papers about the retraction subject, we can state that research on retracted

papers has mainly examined:


## 1. The retraction reasons: due to publisher's error, authors‘ error, previously un-


accounted-for error, self-citations, honorary writing (bringing in the names of those who have

not played a role or at least played a minor role)  (Budd, Sievert & Schultz, 1998; Foo, 2011;

Steen, 2011a; Grieneisen & Zhang, 2012; Marcus & Oransky, 2014; Moylan & Kowalczuk,

2016; Dal-Ré & Ayuso, 2019).


## 2. The enhanced rate of retracted papers (Tchao, 2014; Brainard, 2018; McCook, 2018;


Al-Ghareebet al., 2018) that the reason for this kind of behavior seems unclear (He, 2013;

Fanelli, 2009; Steen, Casadevall, & Fang, 2013); some reasons are related to ―economic

aspects‖, inherent to the present system of science development such as grants, prizes,

funding, jobs, etc. (Fang & Casadevall, 2011; Stern, Casadevall, Steen  & Fang, 2014). On the

other hand, the rapid rate of discovering retracted papers has a root in the self-expression of

authors (Wager & Williams, 2011), the creation of some websites in order to track research,

such as retraction watch1 (Marcus & Oransky, 2014), an increase in the level of scrutiny over

articles by the widespread use of the Internet, and also an in-depth review by some editors-in-

chief of the journals or by reviewers (Moylan & Kowalczuk, 2016).


## 3. The impact of retracted papers on future scientific findings, through examining


different kinds of citations in which most citations have been reported as being positive

(without any criticism) (Decullier, Huot, Samson & Maisonneuve, 2013; Furman,  Jensen &

Murray, 2012; Nath, Marcus & Druss, 2006; Trikalinos, Evangelou  & Ioannidis 2008).


## 4. The time lag between the publication of an article and its retraction has also been


considered (Chen et al., 2013; Foo, 2011; Steen, Casadevall & Fang, 2013).  It takes about

two years, ―on average‖, for a paper to be retracted after publication (Bar-Ilan & Halevi,

2017; Budd, Sievert, Schultz & Scoville, 1999; Korpela, 2010; Steen, 2011b; Trikalinos et al.,

2008).


## 5. Effects of citation to retracted papers have been one of the most debated subjects. The


evidence suggests that citations of retracted papers continue as if they are valid works (Pfeifer

& Snodgrass, 1990; Fang & Casadevall, 2011). Interestingly, citing these papers can have a

positive, negative, or neutral effect (Bar-Ilan & Halevi, 2017) before or after a paper's

retraction (Campanario, 2000; Couzin & Unger 2006). However, editorial and publisher

policies may differ and change with time (Teixeira da Silva & Dobránszki, 2017a). Positive

effects are considered when citations use the content of retracted papers to support an

argument regardless of the scientific validity of these retracted papers. Negative effects, on

the contrary, occur when citations criticize the content of the retracted papers (pre-or post-

retraction) and highlight the errors that have occurred in those papers. Of course, neutral

effects are for citations that refer to a retracted (or to be retracted) paper in the literature

section without any judgment on its validity. Bar-Ilan and Halevi (2017) showed that 83% of

citations to retracted papers were positive, 12% were neutral, and only 5% were negative.

Bar-Ilan and Halevi (2017) also suggested that ―positive citations‖ of retracted papers

1 http://retractiondatabase.org/RetractionSearch.aspx?

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

321

continue to be made despite retraction notice on publisher‘s online platforms and without

attention for reasons of retraction.  Moreover, given that it usually takes two years for a paper

to be retracted after its publication (Bar-Ilan & Halevi, 2017; Budd et al., 1999; Korpela,

2010; Steen, 2011b; Trikalinos et al., 2008), there is a good chance for a retracted paper to

affect its subsequent papers. Additionally, many retracted papers likely continue to receive

post-retraction citations (Chen et al., 2013). For example, many retracted articles in radiation

oncology appear to be cited after their retraction; plenty has been referenced as legitimate

articles (Hamilton, 2019). Another study on retracted and unretracted articles in the

engineering domain shows that their citations continue and affect their scientific creditability

(Rubbo, Pilatti & Picinin, 2019). Besides, some risks occur after continuing to cite the

retracted papers. Some authors believe that their findings and results are still valid (da Silva &

Dobranszki, 2017),  and this, in some sense, can misguide readers.

It means that these kinds of articles written with falsification, fabrication, or unreliable


## data may lead to dubious results. For these results, advancement is somewhat deceptive when


we use them as a reference or in solving problems. Thus, quantitative knowledge of the

number of retracted papers cited in subsequent publications can provide an alarm point to our

scientific community and the general public. Besides the probability of retraction study,

another purpose of our article is to find (and display) the cause(s) and effect(s) of a retracted

paper on subsequent publications. We consider that in publishing such considerations, we

tend to be avoiding the insertion of bibliographic information of retracted papers in

unretracted articles; in doing so, we hope that we can help increase the growth of deprived

science. Our study, therefore, aims to measure the effect of retracted papers on research

publications. Our investigation bears upon cases in journals indexed in the WoS database. It is

the most important database globally, covering various disciplines and enabling comparisons

across scientific areas.

First, we observe the timeline of the number of retracted papers. Given the plethora of

newly appearing journals, following the open access scheme, we add among ―Research

Accountability‖ considerations a study measuring whether there might be a significant

correlation between a ―journal quartiles‖ and the number of retracted papers. Measuring the

correlation between the ―quality‖ of journals and the number of retracted papers stems from

the fact that consequences on research activity might be more drastic if retracted papers are

from top journals since most researchers and audiences may rely on their conclusions. Indeed,

there is no need to stress that any current research is very dependent on prior research. As a


## result, earlier papers play a remarkable role in forming those published later. Thus, it is


interesting to examine how often the retracted papers are cited and which ones are cited by (to

be) retracted papers, whence they influence future research!

Therefore, the present study aims to answer the following questions:

 How many papers have been retracted (from 1975 to 2020)?

 What is the distribution of retracted papers in the journals indexed in the Journal

Citation Report database (JCR)?

 What is the effect of retracted papers on JCR journals‘ papers (retracted or not)?

We also want to achieve some research objectives, including:


## 1. Investigate whether a significant correlation exists between journal quartiles (Q1, Q2,


Q3, and Q4) and the number of retracted papers, i.e., whether retracted papers have

significantly been published in high-quality journals with high impact factors.

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



322

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...


## 2. Investigating whether a significant difference exists between the average number of


unretracted and of retracted papers citing retracted papers; as a matter of fact, we want to

know whether or not the retracted papers are more often cited than retracted papers in

comparison with unretracted papers.


## 3. Investigate whether a significant difference exists between the average number of


retracted and unretracted papers cited by retracted papers; i.e., the retracted papers result from

previous unretracted papers or other retracted papers.


## Methodology


We collected data from the WoS database (on 7 June 2020)2 according to the search

strategy outlined in Figure 1. The data included total records and cited references between

1975 and 2020. Retraction notices were excluded in order to avoid duplication.

Web of Science

Web of Science Core

Collection ; Book Citation

Index

Year published: 1975-2020

Document Type: Retracted

publication

Document Type: Retracted

publication

Export full record and cited


## reference


Figure 1: Search strategy for collecting data



We should notice that WoS does not have all retracted articles indexed under the

publication type ―Retracted Publication‖. Based on WoS, a retracted publication is an article

that an author, institution, editor has withdrawn, or a publisher because of errors or

unsubstantiated data. However, we use the data from WoS instead of the Retraction Watch


## Database (retractiondatabase.org) because of our software. In so doing, when gathering data


from citation indexes such as WoS and Scopus, we can import data in scientometrics and

bibliometrics software. We do not use Retraction Watch because most bibliometrics software

only accepts output from some compliant citation databases. We also ignore records with the

tag ―Retraction‖ in this study. These include some records which were tagged as retractions in



2 The WOS database was queried for allowing us to retrieve all publications published between 1975 and 2020

without any limitation based on the document type.

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

323

WoS, but the article was not retracted, i.e., practically removed from the journal or website.

An example is one article entitled ‗Evidence-based indicator approach to guide preliminary

environmental impact assessments of hydropower development‘. Some editors prematurely

published the mentioned article, but the correct version of this article was published in another

journal. Moreover, there are some records with ‗retraction‘ tags without any traces of the full

text of the paper even with ‗retracted paper‘ captions. Notice that some retraction notices can

be found in WoS; however, the full text of the related articles is unexpectedly not tagged as

―retracted paper‘‘. An example is ‗‘MicroRNA-493 Suppresses Tumor Growth, Invasion and

Metastasis of Lung cancer by Regulating E2F1‘‘.3

We found 5693 retracted papers by 19482 authors published in 2046 journals. After

exporting data from WoS as a txt file, we provided data with the editing of the first line of txt

file and replaced it with the phrase ―ISI Export Format‖. Then, we imported collected data

from WoS into HistCite software. Then, we exported Outputs from the HistCite™ software

into Excel format as a ".csv" file. However, by using the filtering header and observing the

content of each cell, we understood that some data were not correctly sorted out on transfer.

As a result, we checked records one by one to ensure that the data was listed correctly,

according to

(i) The number of authors of each retracted paper;

(ii) The number of citations to each paper in the entire WoS database (GCS)4;

(iii) The number of citations to each retracted paper by other retracted papers (LCS)5;

(iv) The number of unretracted and retracted papers in the reference section of each

retracted paper.

The extracted data were then entered into SPSS software (version 21.0; SPSS) for

statistical analysis.

Next, to answer the research question as to the ―quality‖ of journals in which there were

retracted papers, a list of journals along with quartiles published by the JCR database was

extracted. Then, we deleted the duplicated titles. Indeed, a journal can be categorized under

different quartiles due to the different research areas it covers. We exported the title of

journals related to retracted papers as a CSV file. Finally, we compared titles of journals and

lists of journals with quartiles to assign a unique quartile to each journal such that the journal

with the highest quartile is retained.


## Results


The number of retracted papers per year

Figure 2 illustrates how many papers were retracted from 1975 to 2020. The number of

retracted papers has increased over the period. Firstly, it remained relatively stable from 1975

to 1990. However, after a fluctuation between 1991 and 1996, one can see a sharp increase

from 1997 to 2007. While the number of retracted papers fluctuated again between 2008 and

2013, it peaked at 453 retracted papers. After that, the number has decreased but has not much

reduced in recent years: it was still above 50 in 2019. In the 21st century, the number of

retracted papers has been increasing, the rate roughly doubled from 2003 to 2010, but since

3 In order not to increase the visibility of such articles, the reader can observe that we do not explicitly refer to

these in the reference list.

4 Global Citation Score

5 Local Citation Score

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



324

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

2015, the number has leveled off (Figure 2).

500

453

425

450

410

395

381

371

370

400

355

342

Number of retracted works

317

350

293

300

259

250

205

173

173

200

134

150

112

112

90

100

64

51

38

37

23

50

21

21

14

12

9

7

6

4

4

3

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

2009

2011

2013

1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2015

2017

2019

Years

Figure 2: The number of retracted papers per year in journals indexed in the WoS



Distribution of retracted papers in the journals indexed in the JCR database

Among the 2046 journals6 with at least one retracted paper, 1893 journals have an impact

factor and are indexed in Journal Citation Report; only 153 journals with 495 retracted papers

have no impact factor.  In the top two quartiles, there are 1278 journals which include 3975

retracted papers. The results of Table 1 suggest that most retracted papers were published in

high-impact factor journals.



Table 1

Dissemination of retracted papers based on Journal ranking in JCR quartiles

Total number of retracted papers: 5693

Total number of retracted papers in journals with impact factor: 5198

Journals‘ quartiles

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Frequency and parentage

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

Retracted papers in journals  with

impact factor

2406

46%

1569

30% 753

15%

470

9%

Total number of journals with retracted papers: 2046

Total number of journals with impact factor having retracted papers: 1893

Journals‘ quartiles

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

6 Remember that we search whether a journal appears in different quartiles due to its scientific area coverage,

and we select the best quartile for such a  journal.

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

325

Frequency and parentage

n

%

n

%

n

%

n

%

Journals with impact factor having

retracted papers

736

39%

542

29% 386

20%

229

12%

Journals‘ quartiles

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Percentage of retracted papers per

journal with impact factor (measured for

31%

35%

51%

48%

the number of retracted papers from a

journal in a given quartile)

This leads to the next section in which we examine whether there is a correlation between

the quality of the journals, measured by their quartile indicator, and the number of retracted

papers in them.

Correlation between journal quartiles and the number of retracted papers

In order to observe whether there is a significant correlation between the journal quartile

and the number of retracted papers, we first calculate the number of retracted papers in each

journal. As mentioned above, if the journal appeared in more than one discipline, only the

highest journal quartile was used. The Spearman correlation test is used for the ordinal and

scale variables. The positive correlation coefficient (See Table 2) denotes a significant

positive linear correlation between the rank of each journal and the number of retracted

papers, even though this correlation seems very weak7. Thus, with a 99% confidence level, it

can be concluded that the first hypothesis is accepted (rs [1893] = 0.136, p<0.01).



Table 2

Correlation between journal quartiles and retracted papers

Number of

Quartile

indicator of

each journal

Variable

Number

Median

Standard

Deviation

articles in

each journal


## 1. Number of


articles in each

1,893

2.75

5.67

—

0.136*

journal


## 2. Quartile


indicator of

each journal

1,893

2.94

1.036

0.136*

—

p < .01.

Correlation between the average number of unretracted and retracted papers citing

retracted papers

Let us examine whether retracted papers mainly refer to other prior retracted papers or

unretracted papers. In other words, let us examine whether there is any significant difference

between the average number of unretracted and that of retracted papers citing retracted



7 Correlation is the measure of how two or more variables are related to one another. It is a range from 0 to 1

including 00-.19 ―very weak‖, 20-.39 ―weak‖, 40-.59 ―moderate‖, .60-.79 ―strong‖, and .80-1.0 ―very strong‖.

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



326

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

papers. In order to do so, we use the Mann-Whitney U test as usually done when one wants to

compare the means between two independent groups when the dependent variable is either

ordinal or continuous but not normally distributed (Graczyk & Duarte QueiroÂs, 2016). In

order to do so, the number of citations of each retracted paper in the WoS database is

calculated. This results in the total citation per paper (GCS) and the total number of citations

to a retracted paper by other retracted papers (LCS). We subtract the number of retracted

papers citations (LCS) from the total number of citations (GCS) in view of calculating the

number of citations to a retracted paper by unretracted papers. First, we test the normalization

of the data. The result of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test shows that the data (citing retracted

and unretracted papers) is not normally distributed because the P-value is less than 0.01 (See

Table 3). Therefore, one should use a Mann-Whitney U test instead of an Independent t-test.



Table 3

Tests of normality distribution for retracted and unretracted papers

Variable

df

P-value


## 1. Cited retracted papers


5693

0


## 2. Cited unretracted papers


5693

0



The Mann-Whitney U test (See Table 4) indicates that the number of citations received by

the retracted papers from unretracted papers is greater than that from the other retracted

papers (see mean rank). Therefore, there is strong evidence to support a difference between

citations received by retracted papers from both non-retracted and other retracted papers.

Given the fact that the number of papers citing retracted papers is greater than the number of

papers citing unretracted papers, it can be argued that there is a ―chance‖ for these citing

papers to be considered retracted in the future. Therefore, if the theoretical and substantive


## discussions within unretracted papers originate from the content of retracted papers, those



## discussions can be considered ―potentially unreliable‖. Nevertheless, for a satisfactory



## conclusion, one should analyze the text content to determine whether the citation is a criticism


or a positive appreciation.



Table 4

The significant mean difference between the citing retracted and unretracted papers

Variable

Number

Mean rank P-value


## 1. Cited retracted papers


5693

3046.86

0


## 2. Cited unretracted papers


5693

8340.14

0



Difference between the average number of retracted and unretracted papers cited

by retracted papers

This section examines whether authors of retracted papers are mostly referring to other

previously retracted papers or have mostly mentioned unretracted papers in their publications.

Whether there is any significant difference between the average numbers of unretracted and

retracted papers cited by retracted papers (i.e., retracted papers cite other papers) is again

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

327

calculated through a Mann-Whitney U test.

Hence, we subtract the number of retracted references from the total number of references

for calculating the number of unretracted references. First of all, because of scale data, we

calculated the normalization by using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (See Table 5).

Table 5

Test of normality of the number of references for each retracted paper

Variable

df

P-value


## 1. Cited retracted paper


5693

0


## 2. Cited unretracted papers


5693

0



The Mann-Whitney U test indicates that the greater number of references cited by

retracted papers are unretracted papers (See Table 6).



Table 6

The significant mean difference between the number of cited retracted and unretracted papers

Mean

rank

P-value

Variable

n


## 1. Cited retracted paper


5693

2894.95

0


## 2. Cited unretracted papers


5693

8492.05

0


## Discussion


This research investigated the number of retracted papers per year in the WoS database

over a 45-year interval, in particular, to examine whether there is a relationship between

journal quartile and the number of retracted papers in the WoS listed journals as well as if

there is any relationship between retracted papers and the papers they cite and the papers in

which they are cited.

According to our findings, the number of retracted papers has increased over the

examined period. There is nowadays quite a decrease following the prominent peak in 2015.

It seems that the detection of retractable papers has been recently more effective due to the

advancement of fraud recognition systems and more scrutiny in the peer-reviewing process,

and, in fine, pressure from peers. As a result, invalid science is being identified faster than

ever before (Bornemann-Cimenti, Szilagyi, & Sandner-Kiesling, 2016). The increasing

number of retracted papers should be of concern due to the negative impact such a retraction

has; sometimes, there can be dangerous consequences due to the application of retracted

papers that had announced findings in the real world, specifically in health-related

disciplines8. This aspect becomes very critical, especially when retraction is misconduct or

fraud. It is unfortunate but true that an enormous number of papers have been retracted in

recent years due to research misconduct (Fang, Steen & Casadevall, 2012; Marcus &

Oransky, 2014; Samp, Schumock & Pickard, 2012; van Noorden, 2011).

8 The case of the hydroxyhlorine potential effect as a drug against covid-19 is of world knowledge, at the time of

writing this paper.

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



328

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

The current study's findings show that the largest number of retracted scientific papers is

found in journals with high impact factors (Q1). Our findings are consistent with those of

Steen (2011c) based on the data extracted from the PubMed database. Similarly, Fang et al.

(2012) also indicated a significant correlation between the impact factor of journals and fraud

or honest errors.  Rubbo, Helmann, Bilynkievycz dos Santos & Pilatti (2019) also showed that

journals with high impact factors usually have more retracted papers than journals with low

impact factors in the engineering field. Moreover, we observed a significant correlation

between the journal quartiles and the number of retracted papers. In an investigation into the

retraction policy of high-impact-factor journals indexed in the JCR 1999 database, Atlas

(2004) reported that 3.27% of journals  (i.e., 4 out of 122) had a retraction policy. Thus, it

would be better for journal editors to add the retraction policy on the journal website to

inform their authors. Moreover, some examples of retraction can be helpful for authors

because these examples could clearly show how their articles may be retracted.

The analysis of the second hypothesis suggests that retracted papers are among the

citations of a significant number of unretracted papers. This would result in the likeliness of

the scientific basis of published papers being unconsciously and unknowingly derived from

the false claims of retracted papers. Identifying this type of effect is more complicated than

recognizing articles and scientific papers that have been retracted (Chen et al., 2013). This is

especially important in sensitive areas such as medicine, veterinary medicine, and plant

medicine associated with life-related issues. While it is acceptable that researchers use and

refer to retracted papers as unsuitable examples and dangerous practices of knowledge

dissemination, it is also recommended that they do not include these papers in the references

section of their papers. Instead, it is suggested that these papers are only referenced in

footnotes (Eisenach, 2009; Cosentino & Veríssimo, 2016).

The analysis of the third hypothesis suggests that retracted papers have cited unretracted

papers more often than retracted papers. It would seem that retracted papers must not have led

to the production of subsequent retracted papers. The ―technical accountability point‖ about

this finding is whether references in retracted papers, which have cited unretracted papers,

should be omitted in the measure of the number of unretracted papers‘ citations or not. From

our standpoint, citation databases such as WoS and Scopus should address this problem.

Indeed, when one paper is retracted, it is not fair to calculate the number of its cited references

as a correct citation in the calculated number of citations of the previous papers because this is

a retracted paper. Such references should not count in calculating, for example, the Hirsch

index (Teixeira da Silva & Dobránszki, 2017a; 2017b) or when measuring the weight of co-

authors (Ausloos, 2015a; 2015b).

Therefore, this subject reinforces the concern in the citation debate of papers that have

been recognized as reliable sources. As a strategy to address the issue of citing retracted

publications, Teixeira da Silva and Bornemann-Cimenti (2017) state that reference

management software should implement a retraction check during the online submission of

scholarly articles. This detects any retracted papers that authors might have unknowingly cited

in their papers. It can be implemented through modern techniques (Mrowinski, Fronczak,

Fronczak, Nedic & Ausloos, 2016; Mrowinski, Fronczak, Fronczak, Ausloos, & Nedic,

2017). We suggest that the number of unretracted papers‘ citations through retracted papers

should also be omitted. Moreover, Oransky and Marcus (2010) and Teixeira da Silva and

Bornemann-Cimenti (2017) suggest that the status of a retracted paper should be shown along

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

329

with the title of the work or be highlighted in a colorful bar near the title. It is noted that not

all retraction notices are always transparent and explicit. This leads to retracted papers

continuously receiving citations from other papers including unretracted papers. It is,

therefore, recommended that the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) suggests unique

instructions on writing the retraction notice. Van der Vet and Nijveen (2016) also suggest that

authors whose papers are detected for including retracted citations should be allowed, even

post-publication of their papers, to modify their papers by eliminating the retracted resources.

On the other hand, this procedure may reduce the negative impact of science growth.

Given that retracted papers significantly cite unretracted scientific papers, it is suggested that

the effects of previous papers be identified on subsequent papers.  If this effect is based on the

research method or other essential parts of the research, especially in the health sciences and

medicine, the subsequently published papers should be aware of and purge themselves from

retracted paper adverse effects as quickly as possible.

After all, it should be noted that all retracted papers are not of the same type and occur for

several reasons discussed above (Budd et al., 1998; Dal-Ré & Ayuso, 2019). Therefore, the

same decision should not be made about all retracted papers. For instance, a retracted article

due to figure manipulation could still be considered valid since its methodology remains

thorough (Teixeira da Silva & Bornemann-Cimenti, 2017). In that spirit, it is recommended

that owners of citation databases develop a retraction index that calculates a weight of

retraction for retracted papers based on their type of retraction. Such an index advises a

threshold above which papers should not be used in any way. Furthermore, given that many

authors may not be familiar with the instances of retraction, it is suggested that journals make

available examples of retracted papers on their websites. Many journals, in a section they

have as guides for authors, refer the authors to the citation style guides they use and trust that

authors follow the guides carefully. This is only useful for plagiarism.


## Conclusion


Many unretracted papers have cited retracted papers. These are not good news because of

the possible danger a retracted paper can cause. Thus, the authors of the unretracted papers

should evaluate their articles and inform the editors if they have had a notable impact on their


## results. Journals can also choose to review papers with more scrutiny if authors have had


previously retracted papers. In order to do so, journals can create a list of retracted papers‘

authors to which authors of new submissions are compared before the review process. It may

help identify a fraudulent paper in a shorter time since, in conformity with the PubMed


## database, quite a few retracted papers, roughly 53% of fraudulent papers, were written by a


first author who had written other retracted papers as well (Steen, 2011c).  It would also be

interesting to observe the country (van Leeuwen & Luwel, 2014) and/or institutional

affiliation of authors retracting papers (Ahmed, 2020).

There is still a need for deep research to understand whether the reason for the retraction

of an article is the use of previously retracted papers or commitment of errors such as

plagiarism and data manipulation, whatever the misconduct type (DuBois, Anderson,

Chibnall, Carroll & Rubbelke, 2013) beside publisher or author error(s). It seems critical to

re-assess the validity of the claims made in the unretracted papers referenced to the retracted

papers in case they are required to be retracted as soon as possible so that they will not impact

any future paper. As a result, it is suggested that databases oblige journals to monitor papers

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



330

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

that use retracted papers as arguments for their report.


## References


Ahmed, K. (2020). Academic integrity: Challenges and strategies for Asia and the Middle

East.

Accountability

in

Research,

27(5),

256-270.

https://doi.org/10.1080/08989621.2019.1646646

Al-Ghareeb, A., Hillel, S., McKenna, L., Cleary, M., Visentin, D., Jones, M., Bressington, D.

& Gray, R. (2018). Retraction of publications in nursing and midwifery research: A

systematic

review.

International

Journal

of

Nursing

Studies,

81,

8-13.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2018.01.013.

Atlas, M. C. (2004). Retraction policies of high-impact biomedical journals. Journal of the

Medical

Library

Association,

92(2),

242-250.

Retrieved

from

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC385306/

Ausloos, M. (2015a). Assessing the true role of coauthors in the h-index measure of an author

scientific impact. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 422, 136-142.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2014.12.004

Ausloos, M. (2015b). Coherent measures of the impact of co-authors in peer review journals

and in proceedings publications. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,

438, 568-578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2015.06.010

Bar-Ilan, J. & Halevi, G. (2017). Post retraction citations in context: A case study.

Scientometrics, 113(1), 547-565.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2242-0

Bornemann-Cimenti, H., Szilagyi, I. S., & Sandner-Kiesling, A. (2016). Perpetuation of

retracted publications using the example of the Scott s. Reuben Case: Incidences, reasons

and possible improvements. Science and Engineering Ethics, 22(4), 1063-1072.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-015-9680-y

Brainard,

J.

(2018).

Rethinking

retractions.

Science,

362(6413),

390-393.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.362.6413.390

Budd, J. M., Sievert, M. E. & Schultz, T. R. (1998). Phenomena of retraction. Reasons for

retraction and citations to the publications. Jama-Journal of the American Medical

Association, 280(3), 296-297. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.280.3.296

Budd, J. M., Sievert, M., Schultz, T. R. & Scoville, C. (1999). Effects of article retraction on

citation and practice in medicine. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 87(4), 437-


## 443. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC226618/


Campanario, J. M. (2000). Fraud: retracted articles are still being cited. Nature, 408(6810),

288-288. https://doi.org/10.1038/35042753

Chen, C., Hu, Z., Milbank, J. & Schultz, T. (2013). A visual analytic study of retracted

articles in scientific literature. Journal of the American Society for Information Science

and Technology, 64(2), 234-253. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.22755

Cosentino, A. M. & Veríssimo, D. (2016). Ending the citation of retracted papers.

Conservation Biology, 30(3), 676-678. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12676

Couzin, J. & Unger, K. (2006). Cleaning up the paper trail. Science, 312(5770), 38-43.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.312.5770.38

Dal-Ré, R., & Ayuso, C. (2019). Reasons for and time to retraction of genetics articles

published between 1970 and 2018. Journal of Medical Genetics, 56, 734-740.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106137corr1

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

331

Decullier, E., Huot, L., Samson, G. & Maisonneuve, H. (2013). Visibility of retractions: a

cross-sectional

one-year

study.

BMC

Research

Notes,

6,

238.

https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-6-238

DuBois, J. M., Anderson, E. E., Chibnall, J., Carroll, K. & Rubbelke, T. (2013).

Understanding research misconduct: A comparative analysis of 120 cases of professional

wrongdoing.

Accountability

in

Research,

20,

320–338.

https://doi.org/10.1080/08989621.2013.822248

Eisenach, J. C. (2009). Data fabrication and article retraction how not to get lost in the woods.

Anesthesiology: The Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 110,  955-956.

https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181a06bf9

Fanelli, D. (2009). How many scientists fabricate and falsify research? A systematic review

and

meta-analysis

of

survey


## data.


PLoS

ONE,

4(5),

e5738.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005738

Fang, F. C. & Casadevall, A. (2011). Retracted science and the retraction index. Infection

and Immunity, 79(10), 3855-3859. https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.05661-11

Fang, F. C., Steen, R. G. & Casadevall, A. (2012). Misconduct accounts for the majority of

retracted scientific publications. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the

United

States

of

America,

109(42),

17028-17033.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1212247109

Foo, J. Y. A. (2011). A Retrospective Analysis of the Trend of Retracted Publications in the

Field of Biomedical and Life Sciences. Science and Engineering Ethics, 17(3), 459-468.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-010-9212-8

Furman, J. L., Jensen, K. & Murray, F. (2012). Governing knowledge in the scientific

community: Exploring the role of retractions in biomedicine. Research Policy, 41(2),

276-290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.11.001

Graczyk, M. B. & Duarte QueiroÂs, S. M. (2017). Intraday seasonalities and nonstationarity

of trading volume in financial markets: Collective features. PLoS ONE, 12(7), e0179198.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179198

Grieneisen, M. L. & Zhang, M. (2012). A Comprehensive Survey of Retracted Articles from

the

Scholarly

Literature.

PLoS

ONE,

7(10),

e44118.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0044118

Hamilton, D. G. (2019). Continued citation of retracted radiation oncology literature-Do we

have a problem? International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics, 103(5),

1036-1042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.11.014

He, T. (2013). Retraction of global scientific publications from 2001 to 2010. Scientometrics,

96(2), 555-561. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0906-3

Herteliu, C., Ausloos, M., Ileanu, B. V., Rotundo, G. & Andrei, T. (2017). Quantitative and

qualitative analysis of editor behavior through potentially coercive citations.

Publications, 5(2), 15. https://doi.org/10.3390/publications5020015

Korpela, K. M. (2010). How long does it take for the scientific literature to purge itself of

fraudulent material?: The Breuning case revisited. Current Medical Research and

Opinion, 26(4), 843-847. https://doi.org/10.1185/03007991003603804

Marcus, A., & Oransky, I. (2014). What studies of retractions tell us? Journal of

Microbiology and Biology Education, 15(2). https://doi.org/10.1128/jmbe.v15i2.855

McCook, A. (2018). One publisher, more than 7000 retractions. Science, 362(6413)

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



332

Are We Standing on Unreliable Shoulders? The Effect of  ...

393.10.1126/science.362.6413.393

Moylan, E. C. & Kowalczuk, M. K. (2016). Why articles are retracted: a retrospective cross-

sectional study of retraction notices at BioMed Central. BMJ open, 6(11), e012047.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012047

Mrowinski, M. J., Fronczak, A., Fronczak, P., Nedic, O. & Ausloos, M. (2016). Review time

in peer review: Quantitative analysis and modeling of editorial workflows.

Scientometrics, 107(1), 271-286. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-016-1871-z

Mrowinski, M. J., Fronczak, P., Fronczak, A., Ausloos, M. & Nedic, O. (2017). Artificial

intelligence in peer review: How can evolutionary computation support journal editors?

PloS one, 12(9), e0184711.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0184711

Nath, S. B., Marcus, S. C. & Druss, B. G. (2006). Retractions in the research literature:

misconduct

or

mistakes?

Medical

Journal

of

Australia,

185(3),

152-154.

https://doi.org/10.5694/j.1326-5377.2006.tb00504.x

Oransky, I. & Marcus, A. (2010, 3 August). Why write a blog about retractions? Retraction

Watch Blog. Retrieved from http://retractionwatch.com/2010/08/03/why-write-a-blog-

about-retractions/

Pfeifer, M. P. & Snodgrass, G. L. (1990). The continued use of retracted, invalid scientific

literature. Jama-Journal of the American Medical Association, 263(10), 1420-1423.

Rubbo, P., Helmann, C. L., Bilynkievycz dos Santos, C. & Pilatti, L. A. (2019). Retractions

in the Engineering Field: A Study on the Web of Science Database. Ethics & Behaviour,

29(2), 141-155. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508422.2017.1390667

Rubbo, P., Pilatti, L. A. & Picinin, C. T. (2019). Citation of retracted articles in engineering:

A study of the web of science database. Ethics & Behavior, 29(8), 661-679.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10508422.2018.1559064

Samp, J. C., Schumock, G. T. & Pickard, A. S. (2012). Retracted publications in the drug

literature.

Pharmacotherapy,

32(7),

586-595.

https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1875-

9114.2012.01100.x

Sharma, B. B. & Singh, V. (2011). Ethics in writing: Learning to stay away from plagiarism

and scientific misconduct. Lung India: Official Organ of Indian Chest Society, 28(2),

148-150. https://doi.org/10.4103/0970-2113.80337

Shuai, X., Rollins, J., Moulinier, I., Custis, T., Edmunds, M. & Schilder, F. (2017). A

Multidimensional Investigation of the Effects of Publication Retraction on Scholarly

Impact. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 68(9), 2225-


## 2236. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23826


Steen, R. G. (2011a). Retractions in the scientific literature: Do authors deliberately commit

research

fraud?

Journal

of

Medical

Ethics,

37(2),

113-117.

https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.2010.038125

Steen, R. G. (2011b). Retractions in the scientific literature: Is the incidence of research fraud

increasing?

Journal

of

Medical

Ethics,

37(4),

249-253.

https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.2010.040923

Steen, R. G. (2011c). Retractions in the medical literature: How many patients are put at risk

by

flawed

research?

Journal

of

Medical

Ethics,

37(11),

688-692.

https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.2011.043133



Steen, R. G., Casadevall, A. & Fang, F. C. (2013). Why has the number of scientific

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022



Sepideh Fahimifar / Ali Ghorbi / Marcel Ausloos

333

retractions

increased?

PLoS

ONE,

8(7),

e68397.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068397

Stern, A. M., Casadevall, A., Steen, R. G. & Fang, F. C. (2014). Financial costs and personal

consequences of research misconduct resulting in retracted publications. Elife, 3, e02956.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02956

Tchao, R. (2014). A need to archive correct biomedical scientific data and to prevent

continued citation of retracted scientific publications. International Journal of

Humanities and Arts Computing, 8, 29-37. https://doi.org/10.3366/ijhac.2014.0097

Teixeira da Silva, J. A. & Bornemann-Cimenti, H. (2017). Why do some retracted papers

continue to be cited? Scientometrics, 110(1), 365-370. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-

016-2178-9

Teixeira da Silva, J. A. & Dobránszki, J. (2017a). Notices and policies for retractions,

expressions of concern, errata and corrigenda: Their importance, content, and context.

Science and Engineering Ethics, 23(2), 521-554. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-016-

9769-y

Teixeira da Silva, J. A. & Dobránszki, J. (2017b). Highly cited retracted papers.

Scientometrics, 110(3), 1653-1661. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-016-2227-4

Trikalinos, N. A., Evangelou, E. & Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2008). Falsified papers in high-impact

journals were slow to retract and indistinguishable from nonfraudulent papers. Journal of

Clinical Epidemiology, 61(5), 464-470. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2007.11.019

van der Vet, P. E. & Nijveen, H. (2016). Propagation of errors in citation networks: a study

involving the entire citation network of a widely cited paper published in, and later

retracted from, the journal Nature. Research Integrity and Peer Review, 1, 3.

https://doi.org/10.1186/s41073-016-0008-5

van Leeuwen, T. N., & Luwel, M. (2014). An in-depth analysis of papers retracted in the Web

of Science. In Context Counts: Pathways to Master Big and Little Data”. Proceedings of

the science and technology indicators conference (pp. 337-344).

van Noorden, R. (2011). Science publishing: The trouble with retractions. Nature, 478

(7367), 26-28. https://doi.org/10.1038/478026a

Wager, E. & Williams, P. (2011). Why and how do journals retract articles? An analysis of

Medline retractions 1988–2008. Journal of Medical Ethics, 37(9), 567-570.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jme.2010.040964

IJISM, Vol. 20, No. 1                                                                                                          January / June 2022