Received: 13 October 2021  |  Revised: 16 January 2022  |  Accepted: 13 February 2022

DOI: 10.1111/rati.12331

O R I G I N A L  A R T I C L E

Eternalism and the problem of hyperplanes

Matias Slavov

Philosophy, Faculty of Social Sciences,

Tampere University, Tampere, Finland


## Abstract


Eternalism is the view that the past, the present and the

Correspondence

Matias Slavov, Philosophy, Faculty of Social

Sciences, Tampere University, P. O. Box FI-­

33014, Tampere, Finland.

Email: matias.slavov@tuni.fi

future exist simpliciter. A typical argument in favor of this

view leans on the relativity of simultaneity. The ‘equally real

with’ relation is assumed to be transitive between spacelike

separated events connected by hyperplanes of simultane-

Funding information

Research funding provided by the Academy

of Finland

ity. This reasoning is in tension with the conventionality of

simultaneity. Conventionality indicates that, even within a

specific frame, simultaneity is based on the choice of the

synchronization parameter. Hence the argument for eter-

nalism is compromised. This paper lays out alternative eter-

nalist strategies which do not hinge on hyperplanes. While

we lack a rigorous proof for eternalism, there are still co-

gent reasons to prefer eternalism over presentism.

K E Y W O R D S

conventionality of simultaneity, eternalism, metaphysics of time,

philosophy of physics, relativity of simultaneity

1 | INTRODUCTION

Traditional eternalist arguments apply the relativity of simultaneity together with hyperplanes that connect

spacelike separated events. For these arguments to work, one needs to assume both ontological simultaneity and

the transitivity of reality. Consider three distant events, A, B and C. A and B are in fact simultaneous. B is in fact

simultaneous with C. A and B are co-­real, so are B and C. Therefore, A and C are co-­real. All events exist tenselessly

in spacetime. Whether something is past, present or future is dependent upon the perspective. Someone's ‘now’

can be some other's past or future: the past, the present and the future are equally real.

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and

reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

© 2022 The Authors. Ratio published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Ratio. 2022;35:91–103.



wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/rati  | 91



92 |

SLAVOV

The conventionality of simultaneity raises worrying issues for such arguments. If simultaneity is a matter of con-

vention, different choices of the synchronization parameter yield different simultaneity relations. If hyperplanes are

arbitrary constructions, arguments relying on ontological simultaneity and co-­reality relations become questionable.

This article considers alternative strategies for the eternalist. To that end, the following structure is applied.

Section 2 presents arguments that lean on hyperplanes. They provide rather straightforward reasons to subscribe to

eternalism. Section 3 analyses the debate over the conventionality of simultaneity. If simultaneity is not ontological

but instead based on our preference, the traditional eternalist arguments are compromised. Section 4 considers the

conventionalist challenge. It shall be argued that there are good reasons to uphold eternalism even in the absence of

hyperplanes. Section 4.1 clarifies the distinction between relativity and conventionality of simultaneity. The transitiv-

ity of reality is not questioned by conventionality. Relative quantities, like tensed locations, are both real and relative.

Each observer has their own moment of ‘now’. This reasoning is eternalist in spirit, as it treats tenses as perspectival

and indexical. Section 4.2 makes the case for the distinction between appearance and reality by applying the relativity

of simultaneity. Observers may perceive two events as simultaneous, but the actual physical events causing the obser-

vations could be successive (relative to an inertial frame). Although conventionality may not be completely thwarted,

there are good reasons to think simultaneity is relative in the ontological sense. Accordingly, there is no unique present

moment stretched throughout the entire universe. This suffices to render eternalism more credible than presentism.

2 | ARGUMENTS THAT DRAW ON HYPERPLANES

To apply Cornelis Willem Rietdijk's (1966, p. 341) notation, we may consider two inertial systems. W1 at O1 is co-­

real with W2 at O2 per {X1, T1}, while W2 at O2 is co-­real with W1 at P2 per {X2, T2}. Therefore, W1 at O1 is equally real

with their future version W1 at P2. Conversely, W1 at P2 is equally real with their past version W1 at O1 (Figure 1).

Applying hyperplanes to a relativistic spacetime diagram indicates, in a rather straightforward way, eternalism.

The past, the present and the future all exist.

Less than six months after Rietdijk's paper, Hilary Putnam published an analogous result. To properly contex-

tualize his argument, Putnam (1967, pp. 243–­245) contrasts his view to Aristotle on future contingents. This is cer-

tainly a well-­known topic which has spurred multiple commentaries throughout history (Øhrstrøm & Hasle, 2020).

In the interpretation of Putnam, Aristotle was an indeterminist. The outcome of future events is not determined at

the present time. Therefore, statements about the potential sea-­fight tomorrow do not presently have a truth value.

Jaakko Hintikka (1964, pp. 464–­465) points out that sentences for Aristotle contain explicit or implicit references

to the present time. They are not based on an objective chronology but depend on the moment of their utterance.

T

T

T'1

1

2

P

P1

X

2

P2

W2

W1

X

O

O

1

2

1

FI G U R E 1 A modification of Rietdijk's (1966, p. 341) diagram [Colour figure can be viewed at

wileyonlinelibrary.com]



| 93

SLAVOV

light ray

light ray

my 'now'

your 'now'

your worldline

my worldline

the space-fight

FI G U R E 2 Putnam's (1967, p. 241) diagram slightly modified [Colour figure can be viewed at

wileyonlinelibrary.com]

For Aristotle the difference between the past and the future is that the former is determined whereas the

latter indetermined. We do not know what the future will be but we may affect how it will unfold. We may

know what the past is but we cannot affect how it lies. Putnam (1967, p. 244) claims ‘Aristotle was wrong’. This

is somewhat trivial as the special theory was formulated long after Aristotle. ‘But it is important’, Putnam (1967,

p. 245) goes on, ‘to see that Aristotle's view depends upon an absolute “pastness” and “futurity” just as much as

Newtonian physics does, and that it is obsolete for the same reason’. To show this, Putnam refers to the following

diagram (Figure 2).

Say there is a space-­fight in ‘your future’ but in ‘my past’. The fight is depicted as a point-­event between our

‘nows’.1 If we adopt the Aristotelian view, in your coordinate system, the statement ‘There will be a space-­fight’

has no truth value. However, in my coordinate system, the statement ‘There was a space-­fight’ is true. Both state-

ments concern the same physical event, the space-­fight. There should be a truth on the matter of how the fight

proceeds. At bare minimum, there is a fact of whether the fight takes place or not. If both you and I are right—­you

say there is no truth-­value, I say there is—­we should abandon the objectivity of truth. We could only speak of

‘truth-­for-­me’ and ‘truth-­for-­you’ (Putnam, 1967, p. 244). Physical events like fights are very real phenomenon: it

cannot be merely relative to our utterances whether they take place or not.

The latest defense of the Rietdijk-­Putnam argument comes from Daniel Peterson and Michael David Silberstein

(2010). They are careful to separate two different notions: the ‘reality value’ and the ‘reality relation’. The former

represents the ontological status of an event. It has either the value of one (real) or zero (irreal). The latter is used

to define co-­reality. The reality relation exists between events that have the same reality value. Events have

unique reality values so an event cannot be both existent and non-­existent; that would be a contradiction. The

reality value and the reality relation clarify the definitions of presentism and eternalism. Under presentism, the

present has the reality value of one, whereas the past and the future have reality values of zero. Under eternalism,

the past, the present and the future all have the same reality value of one (Peterson & Silberstein, 2010, p. 212).

‘If it is possible for one to construct a hyperplane of simultaneity’, Peterson and Silberstein (2010, p. 213) note

conditionally, ‘between any two or more events, then these events are said to be simultaneous’. When the two

events have the same reality value, they are equally real. In Minkowski geometry, the invariant spacetime interval

1In the original article, Putnam (1967, p. 244) talks about ‘my future’ and ‘your past’. These denote regions above my and below your ‘nows’. This is

quite confusing as we could not locate the same event between my and your ‘nows’. In any case, the space-­fight is one unique event.



94 |

SLAVOV

is s2 = c2 (Δt)2 −(Δx)2. Hyperplanes may be assigned only to spacelike regions in which s2 < 0, not to lightlike re-

gions in which s2 = 0, or to timelike regions in which s2 > 0. Accordingly, one cannot construct a hyperplane among

lightlike or timelike separated events.

For the presentist, there is a special moment ‘now’ which is simultaneous with everything that exists in the

entire universe. Moments preceding the ‘now’ do not exist anymore, and moments coming after the ‘now’ do not

yet exist. For the eternalist, the ‘now’ is not ontologically privileged but as real as the past and the future. Consider

three events: (1) breakfast, (2) lunch and (3) dinner. If 2 occurs ‘now’, the presentist thinks it is exclusively real.

Having lunch is absolutely simultaneous with everything that occurs anywhere in the world. 1 is no more and 3

is not yet. If 2 occurs ‘now’, the eternalist thinks it is equally real with 1 and 3. What occurs ‘now’ is perspectival

for the eternalist. We might be having lunch right ‘now’, but our past breakfast or future dinner exist as well. One

reason for this is that there is no unique simultaneity relation among events.

Peterson and Silberstein lean on the relativity of simultaneity to support eternalism over presentism. Figure 3

depicts four events. A is ‘Andy hits his toe’ and B ‘Betty hits her toe’. A′ denotes ‘Andy shouts in pain’ and B′ ‘Betty

shouts in pain’. In their common frame, A and B are simultaneous at time t1, and A′ and B′ at time t2. Hence we have

ArB

A′rB′

in which r means to ‘share a reality value with’, or ‘is equally real with’. Co-­real events have the same reality

value of one. Say two spaceships fly above Andy and Betty. They move to opposite directions with (humanly

speaking) considerable constant velocities. In the frame of the first spaceship, marked with primed axes, Betty's

hitting her toe is simultaneous with Andy's shouting in pain. In the frame of the second spaceship, marked with

double primed axes, Andy's hitting his toe is simultaneous with Betty's shouting in pain. When we consider three

inertial frames, the one shared by Andy and Betty, and the two different spaceship frames, we get

ArB

A′rB′

BrA′

ArB′

W

W

W



W

W

%

$

W

$

%

W

[

[

[

FI G U R E 3 Peterson's and Silberstein's (2010, p. 214) relativity of simultaneity spacetime diagram slightly

modified



| 95

SLAVOV

Peterson and Silberstein (2010, p. 215) note that co-­reality is transitive across frames. If αrβ, and βrγ, then

αrγ. Thus,

ArA′

BrB′

An earlier event is equally real with a later event; a later event is equally real with an earlier event. All events,

irrespective of their spacetime location, exist. The earlier-­than and later-­than relations are fixed, but locating an

event in the past, in the present or in the future is relative to a frame of reference. Consequently, all tensed loca-

tions exist.

The conclusion of this argument might be criticized because we are using, perhaps in a circular fash-

ion, the notion of ‘real’. A working physicist's objection might be something like this.2 Say an astronomer

is making trajectory corrections for a satellite orbiting Jupiter. To that end, they need to know where the

satellite is right ‘now’, how long the signal will take to reach it, and where it will be when the signal gets

to it. Of course, there is no ambiguity about the ‘realness’ of the object at any given moment. What is

‘now’ to me is irrelevant for the satellite's existence. All observers possess unproblematic notion of ‘real-

ness’ associated with their own spacetime diagrams. We may realize the doctrine of eternalism only after

attempting to merge every disparate personal spacetime diagram into one universal spacetime. In re-

sponse to such worry, it might be pointed out that the astronomer on Earth does not know where the

satellite is based on stretching their own present moment throughout space. Instead, the position of the

satellite is known based on its previous locations and its predicted location. There is an inference which

is based on known variables at the different times the object moves along a measured/predicted trajec-

tory. This conclusion is not reached based on the putative universality of the ‘now’. There is no need to

think that we should merge individual spacetime diagrams into one universal spacetime.

Carlo Rovelli (2019) sides neither with presentism nor eternalism. In his view, there is no place for a preferred,

observer-­independent present moment in a relativistic spacetime. The idea of a universal ‘now’ is a fiction, an ille-

gitimate extrapolation of our own local experience. Rovelli claims that we should not opt for eternalism, either. He

thinks the Rietdijk/Putnam, or Peterson/Silberstein type of arguments are based on a confusion of what simulta-

neity relations are. In the view of Rovelli, these arguments conflate obsolete Newtonian and relativistic concepts.

Thus, he puts it as follows:

Einstein's simultaneity is not a discovery of a fact of the matter about multiple simultaneity sur-

faces: it is the discovery that simultaneity has no ontological meaning beyond convention. (Rovelli,

2019, p. 1328)

Dennis Dieks (2012, pp. 618–­619) raises the same worry. If we omit ‘the well-­known debate about the

conventionality of relativistic simultaneity’, which perhaps indicates that ‘simultaneity is purely conventional

and lacks metaphysical significance’, there is ‘no reason to suppose that simultaneous events share a special

“reality-­property”’. This means there is no reason to think simultaneous events share the same reality value

of one, are equally real with each other. In the same vein, Hanoch Ben-­Yami (2015) has argued that such

arguments employ false premises. The reliance on hyperplanes, the critics insist, becomes a non-­starter for

eternalism.

2I thank the reviewer of the journal for raising this objection.



96 |

SLAVOV

3 | CRITICISM CONCERNING HYPERPLANES: THE DEBATE

CONCERNING THE CONVENTIONALITY OF SIMULTANEITY

We may start our analysis from Albert Einstein's (1905) paper ‘On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies’. In the

section ‘Definition of Simultaneity’, Einstein proposes that every judgment involving time is always a judgment

about simultaneous events. He mentions an unproblematic case: the time a train arrives at a station. The arrival

time is simultaneous with a specific reading of a clock. If the clock is at the same place with the train, or close to it,

like at the railway platform, the question ‘When does the train arrive?’ does not present a difficulty. A definition

like this is apt provided that ‘time has to be defined exclusively for the place at which the clock is located’ (Einstein,

1905, p. 142). The definition is nevertheless insufficient for cases in which the relevant events occur at different

locations, especially if they are very far from each other.

This brings us to the problem of synchronization. Say we could construct two ideal clocks with the exact same

‼

AB. According to Einstein's proposal, we may send a ray of light from location

constitution separated by a distance

A to B, which is then reflected from B to A. The time the signal leaves from A is tA, which is measured by an ideal

clock at A. The time it gets to B and bounces back is tB, and that time is measured by an identical clock at B. The

time of arrival at A is tA′ measured by the clock at A. The two clocks are in synchrony if tB −tA = tA −tB.

‼

AB

tA −tA ‘is a

Einstein (1905, p. 143) writes that ‘based on experience, we also postulate that the quantity’

2

universal constant (the velocity of light in empty space)’. The average speed of light in a closed curve is invari-

ant: this has been empirically confirmed. The famous Michelson–­Morley experiment, for instance, utilized

mirrors and recorded the roundtrip time of light with the aid of an interferometer. However, as Henri Poincaré

already pointed out before Einstein, there is no experimental way of ascertaining the constancy of the one-­

way speed.3

In his Philosophy of Space and Time (1958), Hans Reichenbach went on to argue that simultaneity of two distant

events is indeterminate.4 Say eA is the event ‘Light leaves from A toward B′. eB is the event ‘Light reaches B and

reflects to A’. eA′ is the event ‘Light gets backs to A’. Under Reichenbach's causal theory of time, the successive

temporal is fixed. A rebounding light signal establishes a causal chain. In other words, the light first leaves point A,

second it rebounds on B, and third it returns to A. These timelike separated events occur in a definite order. Not

so for spacelike separated events. Adopting Einstein's notation but adding Reichenbach's synchronization param-

eter ε, the definition of synchrony becomes tB = tA + ε (tA −tA

)

, 0 < 𝜀< 1. If the speed of light is isotropic, 휀= 1

2.

However, because the one-­way speed of light is a postulate based on a definition, not on any brute fact about

nature, the choice of the synchronization parameter is conventional (Jammer, 2006, pp. 176–­178).

Adolf Grünbaum (1973, pp. 348–­349) explicates the same point as Reichenbach. He produces a diagram which

I have modified a little bit (Figure 4). There are six events, E1,E2,E3, and E훼, E훽, E훾. E1 denotes an event in which a light

signal leaves from P1, E2 denotes an event in which the light rebounds from P2, and E3 denotes the event of the light

getting back to P1.

In the figure above, with 휀= 1

2E2 is simultaneous with E훽, and with 휀= 1

4 E2 is simultaneous with E훼, and with

4 E2 simultaneous with E훾.5 ‘It is therefore’, Grünbaum (1973, p. 350) encapsulates the conventionalist thesis,

휀= 3

3The unprovable assumption is “that light has a constant velocity, and in particular that its velocity is the same in all directions. That is a postulate

without which no measurement of this velocity could be attempted. This postulate could never be verified directly by experiment” (Poincaré, 1898,

p. 220).

4Simultaneity at the same place is unproblematic. If two things happen at the same place, the question is not about a temporal simultaneity relation

but about a temporal identity relation (Reichenbach, 1958, p. 124).

5Say that with 휀= 1

2 it takes 1 s for light to reach P2, and then another second to get back to P1. With 휀= 1

4 it would then take 0.5 s for light to reach

P2, and then 1.5 s to get back to P1. With 휀= 3

4 it would take 1.5 s for light to reach P2, and 0.5 s to get back to P1. The roundtrip time P1 −P2 −P1

with all the allowed synchronization parameters is 2 s, but the one-­way trips between P1 −P2 and P2 −P1 with the synchronization parameters used

in the example vary from 0.5 to 1.5 s.



| 97

SLAVOV

FIGURE 4 Which events are simultaneous is conventional [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

E

3

E2

s

E2E

E1

FI G U R E 5 A modification of Malament's (1977, p. 295) diagram (See Robert Trueman's philosophy of physics

lecture: http://www.rtrue​man.com/uploa​ds/7/0/3/2/70324​387/phil_physi​cs_5.pdf. Date of consultation:

February 14, 2022.) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

only by convention or definition that some one of these events comes to be metrically simultane-

‼

E1E3 at P1 then becoming conventionally

ous with E2, the remainder of them in the open interval

either earlier or later than E2.

David Malament's theorem (1977) is developed against Grünbaum's thesis, defending the non-­conventionality of

simultaneity within a given inertial frame of reference. In the formulation of Malament, O depicts an inertial observer

moving through spacetime. The possible light paths from E1 intersect the hyperplane s. If the light paths are reflected

toward O when intersecting s, they will arrive on O at event E3 (Figure 5).

Provided that the speed of light is the same in all directions, the hyperplane s is orthogonal to O. If the one-­way

speed of light is inconstant, the symmetry would break down and the light would reach a different event on O (say

E′

3). John D. Norton (1992, p. 194) sides with Malament, taking him to have shown ‘that the only nontrivial simul-

taneity relation definable in terms of the causal relations of special relativity is the familiar standard simultaneity

relation of 휀= 1

2’. The debate has not so far been settled (Janis, 2018). For example, Ben-­Yami (2006), Grünbaum



98 |

SLAVOV

(2010) and Robert Rynasiewicz (2012) have both provided detailed responses to the non-­conventionalist thesis,

supporting conventionalism.

4 | ETERNALISM MUST NOT HINGE ON HYPERPLANES

This section considers ways in which eternalism can be defended without an explicit endorsement of hyper-

planes. The next subsection clarifies how the transitivity of reality is comprehensible in virtue of the relativ-

ity of simultaneity. The conventionality of simultaneity does not pose a problem in this context, because the

relativity and the conventionality of simultaneity are altogether different notions. The subsequent subsection

argues that the one-­way speed of electromagnetic signals is not merely conventional because it is needed

to make a difference between simultaneity and apparent simultaneity. Even though conventionality cannot

be dismissed, the relativity of spacelike separation is established well enough for eternalism. And this is bad

enough for presentism.

4.1 | Relativity ≠ conventionality

Since the introduction of the special theory of relativity, the relation between the relativity and the conventional-

ity of simultaneity has been much disputed. The former suggests that spacelike separated events are in a definite

order within a specific frame of reference. The latter suggests that spacelike separated events are not genuinely

temporally ordered, not even in a frame-­relative way. Some claim that the relativity and the conventionality of

simultaneity are the two sides of the same coin. Vesselin Petkov (2008, p. 178) argues that

the frame-­dependency of simultaneity demonstrates that no class of absolutely simultaneous

events exists. This means that we are indeed free to choose which events to regard as simul-

taneous since no class of events is objectively or absolutely privileged. Therefore relativity of

simultaneity implies conventionality of simultaneity. The opposite is also true—­conventionality

of simultaneity implies relativity of simultaneity. As distant simultaneity is conventional it fol-

lows that no class of events is objectively privileged as being simultaneous; if such a class of

privileged simultaneous events existed, then simultaneity could not be conventional. But as no

class of events is absolutely (objectively) simultaneous, different observers in relative motion

are not forced (due to the lack of a class of objectively privileged simultaneous events) to share

the same class of simultaneous events, which means that simultaneity is not absolute and is

therefore relative.

Petkov assimilates the conventionality thesis to the process of designating a specific inertial frame. If

frames of reference are indexical notions, and there is no privileged frame, then the choice of the frame is a

matter of convention. For its part, the conventionality of simultaneity, as expressed by Einstein, Reichenbach

and Grünbaum, indicates that even in a specifically designated inertial frame, there is no genuine temporal

order of distant events. According to conventionality, temporal order of spacelike events is indeterminate.

There is no physical basis for distant simultaneity: it is up to our whim what 휀 exactly is, provided that it is 0 >

and < 1.6

6Some, like Gu (2021, p. 11236), point out that ε could be 0 so to render the speed of light infinite in one direction, or 1 so to render it infinite in the

opposite direction. Provided that the time the signal leaves from A toward B is 0, if 휀= 0 in tB = tA + ε (tA −tA

, then tB = tA. This means the one-­way

trip A −B is done instantaneously. If 휀= 1, then tB = tA. That means the one-­way trip B −A is done instantaneously.

)



| 99

SLAVOV

Based on the conventionality but not on the relativity of simultaneity, some have questioned the very existence

of distant simultaneity. Long after the publication of his two relativity theories, Einstein (1949, p. 60) famously went

as far as to claim that ‘there is no such thing as simultaneity of distant events’. The conventionality thesis is hence

radical: distant simultaneity does not exist. It is a meaningless concept.7 The relativity of simultaneity is different

because it does not destroy the temporal order of spacelike separated events. Instead, it indicates that the relation of

simultaneous-­with is not objective or privileged. Different observers assign different spacelike temporal orders, and

no order is privileged over any other order. The relativity and the conventionality of simultaneity do not imply each

other.

We should be careful as to what the relativity of a given quantity implies. Relativity is not to be equated

with unreality. To show this, Slavov (2020) compares the relativity of temporal order to the relativity of elec-

tromagnetic spectrum frequency. From Lorentz transformations for time dilation, we get that if in some frame

two events are simultaneous, Δt = 0. For another frame, the same events are successive, Δt ≠0, because

Δt = v Δx ∕c2√

1 −(훽)2 , Δx ≠0, v ≠0, so Δt is a positive number. In some frame the events are truly si-

multaneous; in another frame they are truly successive. From the Doppler effect equations, we get that a

stationary source emits waves with a wavelength of 휆0, but the approaching source with a wavelength of

(1 −훽) ∕(1 + 훽)휆0, and the receding source with 휆−=

√

(1 + 훽) ∕(1 −훽)휆0. In both cases, the events and

휆+ =

√

the waves are the same for all observers. What is relative is the temporal order and the received frequency.

This applies both in the context of special relativity (relative motion) and in the context of general relativity

(different gravitational fields).

In both cases, the relevant quantities do not have an independent, substantial existence. Tenses and colors are

not out there waiting to be discovered. Their existence is perspectival. Whether something occurs now and is

green in color, for example, is dependent upon the designated frame of reference. The relative and perspectival

nature of some quantity does not mean that the quantity is somehow fictitious. According to eternalism, claims

concerning A-­predicates are indexical in nature. All events are spread across spacetime, and we occupy a contin-

gent spacetime location.8 The truth of tensed statements depends on the contexts of the utterance; it depends on

the specific location in spacetime. This is not principally different from the way we apply indexicals in mundane

circumstances. In the humdrum of our lives, we routinely say things like ‘I am at home’, ‘Our mother is going to visit

us soon’, ‘You just had a cup coffee’, and so on. As long as the viewpoint is recognized—­who makes such claims and

when—­the truth of indexical statements is clear enough.

Although Peterson's and Silberstein's argument relies on hyperplanes, its transitivity condition does not nec-

essarily require them. They make a general claim: ‘any relativistically invariant relational property must be transi-

tive across all reference frames’ (Peterson & Silberstein, 2010, p. 223). They mention lightlike separation of events

A, B and C as an example. If A is lightlike separated from B, and C is lightlike separated from B in the same direction,

then A is lightlike separated from C. This deduction holds independently of how many relativistic frames are added

into the equation. ‘For instance’, Peterson and Silberstein (2010, pp. 223–­224) note,

if event A is light-­like separated from event B in direction x in a frame moving with velocity v and

event B is light-­like separated from event C in direction x in a frame moving with velocity u where

u is not equal to v, it is still the case that event A and event C are light-­like separated in a frame

moving with velocity w no matter what the value of w [as long as remaining in relativistic limits].

Thus, from this simple example, one can see that a relativistic invariant quantity is transitive across

inertial frames.

7Cf. Balashov (2010, p. 56):

Statements about simultaneity and, in general, about the temporal order of spacelike separated events are meaningless in relativistic

spacetime. There is no fact of the matter as to whether one of these events occurs earlier than, simultaneous with, or later than the other.

8The indexicality of A-­predicates and the core tenets of eternalism may be preserved even in research programs reaching beyond spacetime. Le

Bihan (2020) argues that string theory implies standard eternalism, and loop quantum gravity implies atemporal eternalism.



100 |

SLAVOV

The example above concerns lightlike separation, which is certainly different from spacelike separation. What is

significant is the general point about invariance and transitivity of reality. Peterson and Silberstein argue that both

definiteness and distinctness are invariant. The number of events is definite. Different observers do not disagree

on the number of physical events. There are no events that are exclusively relative to a specific frame. Whether an

event is past, present or future is relative; the existence of the event is not. Events exist independently of observers

(Slavov, 2020, pp. 1400–­1401). Definite existence is therefore invariant across frames. The Minkowski spacetime

metric, ds2 = c2dt2 −dx2 −dy2 −dz2, in which s denotes the spacetime interval, and t the coordinate time and x, y

and z the three spatial coordinates, is invariant. It shows that the spacetime separation of distinct events is invari-

ant. No observer could confuse two distinct events. The number and distinctiveness of physical events are both

frame-­transitive.

4.2 | Simultaneity ≠ apparent simultaneity

Marco Mamone Capria (2001, p. 777) observes that

the standard textbook approach to special relativity implies—­with no explicit justification—­that,

although simultaneity is frame-­dependent (relativity of simultaneity), there is just one legitimate

simultaneity notion in any given frame.

What could be the justification for the one legitimate simultaneity notion? For the purposes of our everyday life,

the speed of light is infinite. We use great many technologies that utilize relativistic physics, but in observing some-

thing in our quotidian environment we may neglect the finite propagation of light. As Einstein (1936, p. 358) himself

puts the point in his article ‘Physics and Reality’: ‘We are accustomed on this account to fail to differentiate between

“simultaneously seen” and “simultaneously happening”.’ To expound on this distinction, consider an observer O1 in an

inertial frame located at x1 = 600m. Lasers are turned on at x1 = 0 and at x1 = 1200 m. O1 sees the lights at the same

time. In another frame, O2 is located at x2 = 300m. O2 sees the lights originating from x2 = 0 and x2 = 1200m at the

same time. In yet another frame O3 is located at x3 = 900m. O3 sees the lights coming from x3 = 0 and x3 = 1200m at

the same time. The difference between O1 to O2 and O3 is that in O1's frame the two separate events, namely the turn-

ing on the lasers, happen simultaneously, whereas in O2's and O3's frames the turning on the lasers are only observed

simultaneously. O1 sees the events in the correct order; O2 and O3 do not.

The distinction between ‘simultaneously seen’ and ‘simultaneously happening’ is between appearance and

reality. For this distinction to work, the speed of electromagnetic signals must be isotropic. Although this cannot

be proven by any crucial experiment (if there even is such a thing) or deductive inference, we should nevertheless

remark that the assumption is an integral part of much of physics. Special relativity is not the most fundamental

theory, but it is included in more fundamental theories, including the quantum field theory and of course the gen-

eral theory of relativity. Special relativity is generally accepted by the institutional academy physics community,

and it is actively used in high-­energy physics. It is also the basis of various technologies, including, for example,

cancer treatment, nuclear energy and GPS.

It is many times claimed there are alternative, empirically equivalent interpretations of special relativity.9 The

neo-­Lorentzian interpretation retains the privileged present. This view is very far from the consensus of the phys-

ics community and hence scientific practice. Retaining absolute simultaneity and the universal ‘now’ requires re-

interpreting science on metaphysical (Tooley, 1997) or theological (Craig, 2001) grounds. Many (e.g., Balashov &

Janssen,  2003; Baron,  2018; Wütrich,  2010) have criticized this approach. One questionable assumption of

9Yet historical theories, like Lorentz's ether-­theory, was not completely empirically equivalent to Einstein-­Minkowski theory as the former did not

fit with emerging quantum physics and general relativity (for this point, see Acuña, 2014, Section 5).



| 101

SLAVOV

neo-­Lorentzianism is the postulation of an extra-­structure, a privileged frame with absolute simultaneity. This

structure may not be observed.

William Lane Craig thinks non-­observability is a problem for verificationism, but since positivism has be-

come obsolete, scientific discourse should not rely on verifiability. Craig (2001, pp. 130–­137) maintains

Einstein's verificationism is most clearly present in his operational definition of simultaneity. It reduces time to

readings of clocks and measurable signals traversing between them. Although reading Einstein as an anti-­

metaphysical positivist has been challenged,10 I think Craig is right in pointing out that the conventionality

thesis contains some verificationist strands. My point here is not to reinterpret relativity for the sake of a novel

metaphysical account. To the contrary, I have considered traditional strategies for eternalism which are rooted

in the special theory of relativity. Yet I think there is an element in the conventionalist thesis that is problem-

atic because of its positivist character. This is the problem: Is it possible to find something in a scientific theory

which is only conventional?11

To say that there is something merely conventional is to assume an all-­encompassing distinction between a

strictly conventional and a strictly empirical content of a scientific theory. Before W. V. O. Quine's (1951) ‘Two

Dogmas of Empiricism’, A. J. Ayer and Rudolf Carnap, for example, argued that mathematical and logical truths are

conventional, a priori tautologies and categorically different from verifiable empirical facts. If we consider Quine's

holism, however, the analytic/synthetic dichotomy becomes questionable. This does not suggest there is nothing

separating the conventional and the empirical. Choosing measuring units is conventional: We may describe the

motion of light by using kilometers or miles, seconds or jiffys. There are some experimental results that are very

clear, like the roundtrip time of light, which has been repeatedly measured to be constant. Between the clearly

conventional and the clearly empirical there is a grey area: the one-­way speed of light. It involves a definition

that may not be strictly verified. But a post-­positivist philosophy of science should not require direct sensory

verification of all the theoretical terms of a theory. Instead, the theory as a whole is tested and used in various

circumstances.

In addition of being an important element of a well-­established theory, the isotropy postulate is required for

drawing the difference between ‘simultaneously seen’ and ‘simultaneously happening’. This is a commonsensical

distinction, comparable to other ways of correcting the information we receive with our raw senses. Without the

light postulate, it is hard to see how we could otherwise maintain this distinction.

5 | IN SUMMARY

Classical eternalist arguments rest on ontological simultaneity and the transitivity of equal reality of spacelike sepa-

rated events. These arguments postulate hyperplanes of simultaneity. Their application has been criticized due to the

conventionality of simultaneity. This article explored views which are not premised on hyperplanes. Conventionality

does not debunk the transitivity of reality. It is consistent to say that relativistic quantities, such as the A-­location of an

event, is both relative and real. All events exist equally: tenses are perspectival and indexical in nature. It was also ar-

gued that, although certain aspects of conventionality remain, distant simultaneity is not meaningless or non-­existent.

Within a specific inertial frame, there is a difference between simultaneity and apparent simultaneity. Events occur

in different order in different frames of reference. There is no absolute simultaneity and universal present moment.

That would be required for presentism. Despite its challenges, eternalism remains a compelling metaphysics of time.

ORCID

Matias Slavov

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8515-2449

10The verificationist reading is disputed by Slavov (2019).

11A point like this is made by Kaila (1958).



102 |

SLAVOV


## REFERENCES


Acuña, P. (2014). On the empirical equivalance between special relativity and Lorentz's ether theory. Studies in History and

Philosophy of Modern Physics, 46, 283–­302.

Balashov, Y. (2010). Persistence and spacetime. Oxford University Press.

Balashov, Y., & Janssen, M. (2003). Presentism and relativity. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 54, 327–­346.

https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/54.2.327

Baron, S. (2018). Time, physics, and philosophy: It's all relative. Philosophy Compass, 13, 1–­14. https://doi.org/10.1111/

phc3.12466

Ben-­Yami, H. (2006). Causality and temporal order in special relativity. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 57,

459–­479. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axl019

Ben-­Yami, H. (2015). Causal order, temporal order, and becoming in special relativity. Topoi, 34, 277–­281. https://doi.

org/10.1007/s1124​5-­014-­9237-­8

Capria, M. M. (2001). On the conventionality of simultaneity in special relativity. Foundations of Physics, 31, 775–­818.

Craig, W. L. (2001). Time and the metaphysics of relativity. Springer.

Dieks, D. (2012). Time, space, spacetime. Metascience, 21, 617–­9.

Einstein, A. (1905). On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. In The collected papers of Albert Einstien Volume 2: The Swiss

years: Writings, 1900–­1909 (English translation supplement) (pp. 140–­171). Translated by Anna Beck.

Einstein, A. (1936). Physics and reality. Journal of the Franklin Institute, 221, 349–­382. Translated by Jean Piccard.

Einstein, A. (1949). Autobiographical notes. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), Albert Einstein: Philosopher–­Scientist (pp. 1–­97). MJF Books.

Grünbaum, A. (1973). Philosophical problems of space and time (Second, enlarged version). Reidel.

Grünbaum, A. (2010). David Malament and the conventionality of simultaneity: A reply. Foundations of Physics, 40, 1285–­1297.

Gu, Z. (2021). The time-­lag argument and simultaneity. Synthese, 199, 11231–­11248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1122​9-­

021-­03287​-­1

Hintikka, J. (1964). The once and future sea fight: Aristotle's discussion of future contingents in de interpretatione IX. The

Philosophical Review, 73, 461–­492. https://doi.org/10.2307/2183302

Jammer, M. (2006). Concepts of simultaneity. From antiquity to Einstein and beyond. The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Janis, A. (2018). Conventionality of simultaneity. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of simultaneity. https://

plato.stanf​ord.edu/entri​es/space​time-­conve​nsimu​l/

Kaila, E. (1958). Einstein-­Minkowskin Invarianssiteoria. Ajatus XXI. Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Kirjapaino Oy.

Le Bihan, B. (2020). String theory, loop quantum gravity and eternalism. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 10,

1–­22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1319​4-­020-­0275-­3

Malament, D. (1977). Causal theories of time and the conventionality of simultaneity. Noûs, 11, 293–­300. https://doi.

org/10.2307/2214766

Norton, J. (1992). Philosophy of space and time. In M. H. Salmon, J. Earman, C. Glymour, J. G. Lennox, P. Machamer, J. E.

McGuire, J. D. Norton, W. C. Salmon, & K. F. Schaffner (Eds.), Introduction to the philosophy of science (pp. 179–­231).

Hackett Publishing Company.

Øhrstrøm, P., & Hasle, P. (2020). Future contingents. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. https://

plato.stanf​ord.edu/entri​es/futur​e-­conti​ngent​s/

Peterson, D., & Silberstein, M. (2010). Relativity of simultaneity and eternalism: In defense of the block universe. In V.

Petkov (Ed.), Space, time, and spacetime (pp. 209–­238). Springer.

Petkov, V. (2008). Conventionality of simultaneity and reality. In D. Dieks (Ed.), The ontology of spacetime II (pp. 175–­185).

Elsevier.

Poincaré, H. (1898/2001). La mesure du temps. In Revue de métaphysique et de morale 6, 1–­13. English translation in The

value of science, essential writings of Henri Poincaré (pp. 210–­222). The Modern Library.

Putnam, H. (1967). Time and physical geometry. The Journal of Philosophy, 64, 240–­247. https://doi.org/10.2307/2024493

Quine, W. V. O. (1951). Two Dogmas of empiricism. The Philosophical Review, 60, 20–­43.

Reichenbach, H. (1958). The philosophy of space and time. Translated by Maria Reichenbach and John Freund. Dover

Publications Inc.

Rietdijk, C. W. (1966). A rigorous proof of determinism derived from the special theory of relativity. Philosophy of Science,

33, 341–­344. https://doi.org/10.1086/288106

Rovelli, C. (2019). Neither Presentism nor Eternalism. Foundations of Physics, 49, 1325–­35.

Rynasiewicz, R. (2012). Simultaneity, convention, and gauge freedom. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,

43, 90–­94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsb.2012.01.004

Slavov, M. (2019). Time as an empirical concept in special relativity. The Review of Metaphysics, 73, 335–­353.

Slavov, M. (2020). Eternalism and perspectival realism about the ‘now’. Foundations of Physics, 50, 1398–­1410. https://doi.

org/10.1007/s1070​1-­020-­00385​-­x

Tooley, M. (1997). Time, tense and causation. Oxford University Press.



| 103

SLAVOV

Wütrich, C. (2010). No presentism in quantum gravity. In V. Petkov (Ed.), Space, time, and spacetime: Physical and philosoph-

ical implications of Minkowski's unification of space and time (pp. 257–­278). Springer.

How to cite this article: Slavov, M. (2022). Eternalism and the problem of hyperplanes. Ratio, 35, 91–­103.

https://doi.org/10.1111/rati.12331