[Re] Badder Seeds: Reproducing the Evaluation of

Lexical Methods for Bias Measurement

Lea Tiyavorabun∗

University of Amsterdam

Amsterdam, the Netherlands

lea.tiyavorabun@student.uva.nl

Jille van der Togt∗

University of Amsterdam

Amsterdam, the Netherlands

jille.vandertogt@student.uva.nl

arXiv:2206.01767v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jun 2022

Matteo Rosati∗

University of Amsterdam

Amsterdam, the Netherlands

matteo.rosati@student.uva.nl

Giulio Starace∗†

University of Amsterdam

Amsterdam, the Netherlands

giulio.starace@gmail.com

1

Reproducibility Summary

Scope of Reproducibility

Combating bias in NLP requires bias measurement. Bias measurement is almost always achieved

by using lexicons of seed terms, i.e. sets of words specifying stereotypes or dimensions of interest.

This reproducibility study focuses on Antoniak and Mimno [1]’s main claim that the rationale for

the construction of these lexicons needs thorough checking before usage, as the seeds used for bias

measurement can themselves exhibit biases. The study aims to evaluate the reproducibility of the

quantitative and qualitative results presented in the paper and the conclusions drawn thereof.


## Methodology


We re-implement the entirety of the approaches outlined in the original paper. We train a skip-gram

word2vec model with negative sampling to obtain embeddings for four corpora. This does not require

particular computing requirements beyond standard consumer personal computers. Additional code

details can be found in our linked repository.


## Results


We reproduce most of the results supporting the original authors’ general claim: seed sets often suffer

from biases that affect their performance as a baseline for bias metrics. Generally, our results mirror

the original paper’s. They are slightly different on select occasions, but not in ways that undermine

the paper’s general intent to show the fragility of seed sets.

What was difﬁcult

The signiﬁcant difﬁculties encountered were due to a lack of publicly available code and documen-

tation to clarify missing information in the paper. For this reason, many algorithms that ultimately

turned out to be quite simple required lengthy clariﬁcations with authors or trial and error. Lastly, the

research was quite data-intensive, which caused some implementations to be non-trivial to account

for memory management.

∗Equal Contribution

†Corresponding Author

Preprint.



What was easy

Once understood, the methods proposed by the authors were relatively easy to implement. The

mathematics involved is quite straightforward. Communication was also reasonably accessible. The

authors’ emails were readily available, and the responses came quickly and were always helpful.

Communication with original authors

We maintained a lengthy email correspondence throughout the replication of the paper with one

author, Maria Antoniak. We contacted her to clarify extensive aspects of the paper’s methodology.

Speciﬁcally, this concerned summarizing the data processing approach, explaining missing hyperpa-

rameters, and outlining the aggregation of metrics across different bootstrapped models. None of the

original code was disclosed.

2



2


## Introduction


The emergence of bias quantiﬁcation in Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods has given rise

to two use cases, referred to as downstream and upstream. In the former, bias measurements are

used to debias or correct biases in word representations to avoid encoded biases trickling down when

applying these NLP models [2, 3]. In the latter, bias measurements are used on models trained on

small corpora to quantify the bias present and compare them. This use case has endowed social

scientists with the quantitative foundation to answer political and social questions about bias across

corpora in an empirical manner [11, 6]. Crucially, most bias quantiﬁcation methods depend on

lexicons of seed terms that specify the bias dimensions of interest. The selection of seed terms

varies considerably across the literature, and seed sets themselves may exhibit social and cognitive

biases [1]. It is not clear whether it is possible to re-use seed set across corpora (thereby interfering

with upstream use cases), and elements such as seed term frequency have been shown to affect bias

measurements, and thus downstream uses [4].

We seek to replicate the Antoniak and Mimno [1] paper, hereafter referred to as ”the original

paper/work”. In it, the authors seek to 1) qualitatively explore seed selection and their sources, 2)

demonstrate that features of seed sets such as pairing order, set similarity, and frequency can cause

instability in bias measurements, and 3) make recommendations for the testing and justifying of

seed sets in future work. We have replicated the experiments showing the fragility of seed sets, thus

verifying the claims of a need for better justiﬁcation and analysis of them in future literature. We have

also built a public toolkit to reproduce these measures on arbitrary seed sets and trained embeddings.

3

Scope of reproducibility

This reproducibility study focuses on the authors’ main claim that seed lexicons need thorough

checking before usage to measure bias, as seeds themselves can be biased and induce instabilities

in measurement. The authors conducted a literature review on prior works to gather many seed

sets. They subsequently evaluated the gathered seed sets with a series of bias measurement metrics

proposed by Bolukbasi et al. [2], Caliskan et al. [3], and themselves.

Our work consists of two interconnected efforts: code replication, given the absence of pre-existing

code for the original paper, and reproducing the main results. The latter goal is the main focus of

our work and entails reproducing the outcomes that support the paper’s central claims, which can be

summarized as follows:


## 1. Bias subspaces generated from common bias subspace metrics (e.g., WEAT, PCA) can help


capture the difference represented by the seed set pairs.


## 2. Bias subspaces suffer from instability due to the following factors:


(a) The ordering and pairing of the seed sets.

(b) The selection of seeds that are members of the seed sets.

(c) The degree of semantic similarity between seeds.


## 3. Methods of sourcing seed sets are inconsistent, with disparate strategies being used across


NLP literature.

4


## Methodology


The code from the original paper was not made publicly available. We, therefore, re-implemented the

entire approach from the description in the original paper. The following section will summarize the

resources and methodology used to reproduce the original paper accurately.

4.1

Code

As mentioned above, the code from the original paper is not publicly available. We fully re-implement

all the code, which can be found on GitHub3. We closely follow the original paper’s methodology to

3https://github.com/thesofakillers/badder-seeds

3



achieve accurate reproduction. The reproduction is performed step by step, from downloading and

preprocessing the data to training the models and visualizing the results.

4.2

Documentation

Unfortunately, there was little to no documentation in the original work besides the content of the

original paper. This occasionally lacked crucial information to reproduce the results or was vague

on implementation details. In addition to the original paper, Antoniak and Mimno [1] published a

Github repository that contained a JSON with the metadata on seed sets gathered from prior works4.

4.3

Model descriptions

We train several bootstrapped skip-gram word2vec models with negative sampling on unigrams on

each dataset. This model attempts to predict whether a particular word is a valid context (where

the context window size is a hyperparameter) for a given other word using a single fully connected

hidden layer. The ﬁrst step in training this model is creating a vocabulary of the entire training dataset.

With this vocabulary, each word can be represented as a one-hot vector. The network output is then

a measure of the probability that the word is a valid context. The trained weights from this hidden

layer are then used to obtain word embedding vectors for each term in the training set vocabulary.

4.4


## Datasets


The original paper used four datasets and one pretrained model: New York Times articles from April

15th-June 30th, 20165; high-quality WikiText articles, using the complete WikiText-103 training

set [7]; Goodreads book reviews for the romance and history and biography genres sampled from

the UCSD book Graph [12, 13]; and the pretrained word2vec GoogleNews model6. We use these

same corpora for our research, preprocessing them as closely as possible to the original paper. This

consists of grouping the text into documents, ﬁltering relevant documents, lowercasing and removing

special characters. We then use spaCy [5] for tokenization and POS-tagging. Because the work

is not concerned with model performance, this study makes no use of train/dev/test splits. The

WikiText-103 dataset, however, is pre-split, so like in the original work, we work with the training

split. Links to all these datasets can be found in our Github repository.

Preprocessing statistics of our work and the original paper can be found in Table A.1. We ﬁnd general

agreement in our numbers regarding the total number of documents per dataset. There are minor

discrepancies in the Goodreads datasets, most likely due to implementation differences. We also

count slightly fewer total words than the original paper in all cases, but the orders of magnitude

generally match. We are, however, unable to reproduce vocabulary size accurately. We tried many

strategies in the replication process to obtain these numbers, but none were successful. Furthermore,

looking at the ofﬁcial dataset statistics, for example for WikiText [7], it is clear that our reproduced

vocabulary size is a lot closer to the ground truth than the one by Antoniak and Mimno [1]. Lastly,

mean document length values of each dataset are accurately reproduced, with the WikiText values

suffering the most. The subsections below will discuss each dataset in more detail.

New York Times

This dataset contains 165,900 paragraphs from 8,888 articles from the New York

Times published between April 15th and June 30th 2016. The articles cover a broad range of sections,

including but not limited to movies, sports, technology, business, books, science, and fashion.

WikiText-103

This dataset contains 28,472 manually veriﬁed articles from Wikipedia.org. The

entire training dataset is used, in which lists, HTML errors, math, and code have already been

removed. Furthermore, we removed all formulas still present in the text.

Goodreads

The entire Goodreads dataset contains millions of reviews. This study uses just the

Romance and the History/Biography genres. Five hundred book reviews per book are sampled for

each genre while ﬁltering out all books with fewer than 500 reviews and all reviews containing fewer

than 20 characters.

4https://github.com/maria-antoniak/bad-seeds

5https://www.kaggle.com/nzalake52/new-york-times-articles

6https://github.com/mmihaltz/word2vec-GoogleNews-vectors

4



GoogleNews

Google’s pretrained word2vec model is trained on ca.100 billion words from the

GoogleNews dataset (6). Our use of this model was limited to replicating the results outlined below

for additional robustness.

Seed Set Dataset

Part of the contributions of the original work was creating a catalogue of 178

seed sets gathered from eighteen highly-cited prior works on bias measurements. We refer to this

catalogue as the gathered seeds. Each element of the catalogue comprises a seed set, the category it

represents, a justiﬁcation, the source categorization, a link, and a unique ID. It is readily available on

the original author’s GitHub4. A brief statistical overview can be found in Fig. A.1. We process the

catalogue by lower-casing the seeds and removing bigrams to use them with our models. We also

ﬁlter seed sets containing less than two seeds as we argue that a single seed would not be sufﬁcient to

form a set.

4.5

Experimental setup and code

An environment containing all necessary packages is included in the publicly available repository and

can be quickly set up. To mirror the original paper’s setup, we used the gensim [10] implementation

of skip-gram with negative sampling [8] to train the vector embeddings for all datasets. We used this

library to train our models as that is the framework used by the original paper and to avoid noise due

to different implementations (the investigation of which would be outside the scope of this paper).

Several PyTorch [9] implementations are also available on GitHub if that is preferred7,8.

We reproduce the original paper’s results by focusing on two popular seed-based bias metrics to

measure bias in corpus-derived embeddings: WEAT and PCA. These metrics are used to produce a

bias subspace vector given a pair of seed sets that speciﬁes a bias dimension of interest. The WEAT


## method, introduced in Caliskan et al. [3], produces a vector based on the difference between the mean


vectors of the two target sets. The PCA method, described in Bolukbasi et al. [2], instead requires

that each seed term in one of the seed sets be paired with one seed term from the other seed set. The

subspace vector is then the ﬁrst principal component resulting from the PCA of a matrix constructed

by, for each pair of seeds, taking the two half vectors from the pair’s mean to the two pair members

and using them as two columns of the matrix.

We also reproduce the original paper’s coherence metric, which aims to quantify the robustness of

the bias subspace. This metric is calculated as the absolute value of the difference in mean ranks of

the terms in two seed sets when all the model’s vocabulary is ranked by cosine similarity to the bias

subspace. Another metric used is set similarity, the cosine similarity between the average vectors of

two seed sets.

Finally, when aggregating embeddings of a speciﬁc word across bootstrapped models, we take the

average of the embedding vectors in each model that includes the word. Given a particular pair of

seed sets for coherence aggregation, we only average coherence scores for models containing every

seed term in the two sets to avoid aggregating coherence based on different seed sets.

4.6

Hyperparameters

100-dimensional embeddings were trained for ﬁve epochs on all four datasets, with a ﬁve-word

negative context sampling rate and a window size of ﬁve. We trained embeddings with a minimum

word count of 0, 10, and 100 due to variation in the original paper. This process was repeated for 20

bootstrapped samples of each dataset (with the sample size equal to the number of documents in the


## dataset), resulting in 20 separate models. The bootstrapping provided the stochasticity required for


robustness. To ensure this reproducibility, we use a random seed of 42 throughout.

4.7

Computational requirements

The execution of the reproduced code does not take excessive computing power. This study used no

GPUs or computing clusters. We ran the experiments on an Intel I9 9900k and 32GB of 3200MHz

RAM running Ubuntu 20.04.3 LTS. Table A.3 shows peak RAM usage and time in seconds to

completion for every subprocess of the replication.

7https://github.com/theeluwin/pytorch-sgns

8https://github.com/ddehueck/skip-gram-negative-sampling

5



5


## Results


5.1

Quantitative Results

We started by conﬁrming that the bias subspace does capture the difference or bias that the seed

pairs are intended to represent. For this, we reproduced an experiment by Antoniak and Mimno [1]

ranking the cosine similarity between the ﬁrst Principal Component (PC) of the bias subspace and all

words in the corpus. The top and bottom ten words for each bias subspace are shown in Fig. 1a. In

the shown words of the gender pair subspace and the shufﬂed gender pair subspace gender-related

words are found, whereas none are present in the random pair subspace. However, only the gender

pair subspace divides nicely between male and female terms. We extended this by calculating the

cosine similarity of the top and bottom ten words from the ordered bias subspace for the shufﬂed bias

subspace. The results in Fig. A.2 show she and his as the two highest-ranked words, which are not

split along the intended bias subspace.

she

0.16

0.15

0.15

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.088

0.087

0.086

0.075

0.074

0.063

his

pregnant

officially

pitcher

0.41

0.47

0.47

0.45

0.44

0.44

0.43

0.42

0.41

0.41

0.41

-0.29

-0.29

his

0.48

0.47

0.46

0.44

0.44

0.43

0.43

0.42

0.41

his

himself

0.4

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.35

0.35

0.34

0.34

crown

original

s

himself

baseball

harvey

gender

harvey

catcher

pitching

2018

orchestra

organizers

safety

smoking

prescription

its

espn

valuable

leicester

shakespeare

ryan

wing

matz

speaker

prescription

grand

opera

ryan

speaker

graduation

gold

awards

believe

appreciate

nbc

families

0.4

-0.35

-0.36

-0.37

-0.39

-0.39

-0.39

catcher

-0.4

-0.4

-0.4

-0.41

-0.41

-0.42

-0.42

-0.43

-0.44

-0.44

pitcher

0.05

-0.12

-0.12

-0.14

-0.17

-0.23

-0.33

-0.42

she

smoking

native

grandmother

water

thank

-0.3

-0.3

-0.3

-0.31

-0.31

-0.33

-0.34

-0.34

wing

sex

water

safety

graduation

hope

parents

neighbors

food

matz

re

respect

boyfriend

sex

pitching

need

husband

-0.4

-0.42

-0.42

-0.62

gender

pregnant

fear

saw

want

lives

neighbor

himself

food

mother

shuffled gender

word pairs

gender word

random word

shuffled gender

pairs

pairs

word pairs

(b) Top & bottom ten words of or-

dered subspace ranked for the shuf-

ﬂed subspace.

(a) Compares the top and bottom ten words of each bias subspace

ranked by cosine similarity out of all words in the corpus.

Figure 1: Replication of Fig. 4 of the original paper. Ranks words from corpus by cosine similarity

against different bias subspaces (ﬁrst principal component), with NYT frequency threshold 100.

Fig. 2 shows that the ﬁrst PC has almost always a very high explained variance ratio for the bias

subspace of ordered pairs, which drops off quickly for the subsequent PCs. Instead, the explained

variance ratio per PC drops more smoothly for the shufﬂed pairs. Fig. A.2 shows this behavior by

computing the top and bottom ten words by cosine similarity against the second PC of the gender

subspace. We can observe that the bias subspace of the ordered pairs does not contain gender words

anymore. In contrast, the shufﬂed subspace does have gender words such as her, thereby replicating

the trend observed in Fig. 2. It is also important to note that in Fig. 2 there are exceptional cases

where shufﬂed seed sets produce the ﬁrst PC with a higher explained variance than the ordered seed

sets. In general, these results replicate the trends of the original experiments.

gender pairs

social class pairs

chinese-hispanic name pairs

original order

shuffled

original order

shuffled

original order

shuffled

0.6

Explained Variance Ratio

Explained Variance Ratio

Explained Variance Ratio

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

2

4

6

8

Prinicipal Component

0

2

4

6

8

Prinicipal Component

0

2

4

6

8

Prinicipal Component

Figure 2: Replication of Fig. 3. The ﬁrst ten principal components of the bias subspace for different

seed pairs on the NYT corpus with a minimum frequency of 0.

Fig 3 shows that bias measurement is highly inconsistent across seed sets with the same seed category

sourced from different papers. We used the cosine similarity between female seed sets and the

6



word unpleasantness as a bias measurement. The cosine similarity varies greatly between seed sets,

replicating the same trends as the original paper.

Fig.

4 explores the rela-

tionship between set similar-

ity and the robustness of the

bias subspace. The relation-

ship between set similarity

and the explained variance

of the PCA-derived bias sub-

space vector is plotted for

each dataset and frequency

thresholds. The original pa-

per shows this relationship

only for the WikiText dataset,

and we ﬁnd a similar nega-

tive correlation between set

similarity and explained vari-

ance for that dataset.

romance

history and biography

female-Kozlowski_et_al_2019

female_1-Caliskan_et_al_2017

definitional_female-Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

seed set

female_singular-Hoyle_et_al_2019

female_definition_words_2-Zhao_et_al_2018

female_stereotype_words-Zhao_et_al_2018

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

cosine similairty to unpleasentness

Figure 3: Reproduction of Fig. 2. Displaying the cosine similarity be-

tween the averaged vector of unpleasantness across all 20 bootstrapped

models and different seeds sets of the category female.

Table A.2 qualitatively ex-

plores this relationship, ranking both gathered and generated sets by coherence. More semantically

dissimilar seed sets score higher in coherence than more similar sets. In the gathered sets, seed sets

related to names have extremely low coherence due to their semantics being very similar and the

set pairs containing duplicate terms (see "names black" and "names white"). In the generated sets,

we see that very different terms (such as those relating to careers and those related to lower body

clothing/parts) have high coherence. In contrast, sets such as food terms score much lower. We

observe a similar pattern when using the PCA algorithm as a basis for coherence. These results show

the replicability of the original paper, as they are almost identical.

nyt

goodreads_hb

goodreads_r

wiki

Explained Variance Ratio

1.0

0.8

Black vs White Roles

0.6

Black vs White Roles

0.4

Black vs White Roles

Black vs White Roles

Black vs White Names

Black vs White Names

Black vs White Names

Black vs White Names

0.2

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.0

Black vs White Roles

Black vs White Roles

Black vs White Roles

Black vs White Roles

0.8

Black vs White Names

Coherence

0.6

0.4

0.2

generated

gathered

0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

Set Similarity

0.0

0.5

1.0

Set Similarity

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Set Similarity

0.0

0.5

1.0

Set Similarity

Figure 4: Replication of Fig. 5 from the original paper, displaying Explained Variance Ratio (top)

and Coherence (bottom) vs Set Similarity across the four datasets. We highlight two pairs of gathered

seed sets, Black vs White roles and names. For some corpora, seed terms were not found in the

embeddings, causing the highlighted pair to be missing.

5.2

Qualitative Results

The original paper gathered 178 seed sets of eighteen highly-cited prior work on bias measurement.

These seeds are both embedding-based and non-embedding-based bias detection methods, often

overlapping. The seeds are chosen in a multitude of ways. Only unigram seeds are selected, and

words that do not appear in the training corpus are omitted. We have validated the accuracy of Table

7



3 in the original paper by reviewing each of the eighteen papers and determining which methods the

authors used. We brieﬂy summarize them below:

Borrowed from social sciences

Select seed sets are borrowed from prior psychology and other

social sciences work.

Crowd-Sourced

Crowd-based annotation can create custom seed sets. This method can aid in

gathering contemporary associations and stereotypes. However, controlling crowd demographics

often poses a problem. This can lead to stereotypes being hard-coded into the seeds.

Population-Derived

Seeds can also be derived from government-collected population datasets.

These datasets are usually names and occupations common to speciﬁc demographic groups. A

signiﬁcant problem with this method is that the data tends to be often US-centric and thus gives a

distorted view of the rest of the world.

Adapted from Lexical Resources

Researchers can also draw seeds from existing dictionaries,

lexicons and other public resources. The advantage is that these seeds have already undergone a

round of validation.

Corpus-Derived

This quantitative method is used to extract seeds terms from a corpus. It has the

advantage of ensuring high-frequency words are selected but suffers from similar risks as crowd-

sourced seeds.

Curated

Seed hand-selection by authors often yields high precision seeds but is slow and relies on

unbiased authors.

Re-used

The last method relies on prior bias measurement research for seed terms. The advantage

is that the seeds have already been used, but researchers should not use them without validation.

5.3


## Results beyond original paper


Set Similarity and Bias Subspace in Additional Datasets

We extended the original paper’s set

similarity versus bias subspace explained variance analysis to cover all datasets (beyond WikiText) in

Fig. 4. The negative trend is still present with the NYT corpus, but not in the Goodreads corpora,

where the trend is almost absent or slightly positive. In addition, the positions of the highlighted seed

set pairs are variable across corpora. We also extended this work to examine the relationship between

seed pair coherence versus set similarity, where the inverse relationship is present in all datasets.

Notice that the requirement that coherence is calculated only for models that contain all seed terms

(as described in Section 4.5) makes speciﬁc pairs of seed sets be ignored, as seen from the lack of the

two highlighted set pairs for select datasets.

Testing Minimum Frequency Filter

Due to inconsistencies both in the paper and in commu-

nication with the author in the reported minimum frequency ﬁlter for the skip-gram models, we

experimented with minimum frequencies µ ∈{0, 10, 100}. These enabled us to see results across

the whole vocabulary in the case of µ = 0 and reduce noise from rare words in the case of µ = 10.

We also used µ = 100 to generate Fig. 1 as the original paper.

Seed Toolkit and Pairing Seed Set Data.

Other than extending the experiments of the original

paper, we have two additional contributions. For the sake of reproducibility, we make our code

publicly available and design our repository as an open Python package that can be used to obtain

bias subspace vectors and assess seed set robustness. This toolkit can help future researchers who

aim to evaluate their seeds carefully. Our second contribution is an augmentation of the seed dataset

provided by Antoniak and Mimno [1]. We provided additional annotations regarding pairing, i.e. we

identify which seeds to pair together along standard bias dimensions in a queriable .csv format.

8



6


## Discussion


Overall, our results replicate the data reported in the original paper. This replication lends strong

support to the general claim of the original paper that seed sets incorporate strong inductive biases that

affect their performance as grounding for bias metrics and that researchers should be more cognizant

of these limitations.

Instability in bias subspaces can be introduced by selecting seeds in seed sets, as stated in claim 2b.

Our results in Fig. 3 support this as they reproduce the original work. The same bias measurement

varies across seed sets selected by different authors who assigned it to the same category. In addition,

the dependence of the bias subspace on seed set selection is further supported by Fig. 4. The two

highlighted seed sets (black vs white roles/names) are generally distinct in position for each corpus,

despite theoretically attempting to deﬁne similar bias dimensions.

Another source of instability claimed by Antoniak and Mimno [1] is the ordering and pairing of seed

sets. In Fig. 2 we show that the explained variance ratio for the ordered bias subspaces can behave

very differently from the shufﬂed bias subspaces, supporting claim 2a. Our work in Fig. 1a also

supports this claim. While the ordered subspace successfully splits the top words along the intended

subspace of male and female, the ﬁrst PC of the shufﬂed bias subspace has words such as mother

and boyfriend both ranked on the same end. This shows that while the subspace still picks up on

gender words, it does not represent the intended subspace. Supporting claim 2a that bias subspaces

can become less meaningful with a shufﬂed seed pairing. We could further conﬁrm this behavior by

calculating the cosine similarity of the top words of the ordered subspace for the shufﬂed subspace

in Fig. 1b. These results show that she and his are ranked next to each other at the top and not split

along the intended bias subspace. These experiments lend strong support to claim 2a that the order of

seed pairs can substantially inﬂuence the meaningfulness of the bias subspace and, consequently, the

bias metrics.

Finally, bias subspaces suffer instability due to semantically overlapping seeds being less distinguish-

able in the bias subspace, as stated in claim 2c. Our results in Table A.2 and Fig. 4 demonstrate that

bias subspace vectors are less robust when the seed sets are semantically similar or overlapping. This

relationship lends strong credence to claim 2c. However, our results did show that this inverse rela-

tionship is not conserved across a minority of corpora (e.g., the Goodreads datasets) for the explained

variance metric. More broadly, however, this still shows that the reliability of seed selection is quite

variable. While similar seed sets may generate robust bias subspaces for more semantically equivalent

seed pairs for some corpora, that is not guaranteed. Therefore, while this inverse relationship may be

minimized for speciﬁc corpora, extensive corpus-speciﬁc seed set investigations are still required.

What was easy.

The original paper clearly described the algorithms used to obtain bias metrics.

Additionally, it carefully cited the papers that ﬁrst proposed them, which speciﬁed further details.

This aided our understanding of the underlying concepts and accelerated the implementation of

the frameworks. Model training and embedding generation was also facilitated by the pre-existing

gensim framework. This permitted greater focus on reproducing the details of the experiments

than choosing between alternative implementations of skip-gram word2vec. In addition, responsive

authors permitted quick clariﬁcations through email communication when important details were not

clear.

What was difﬁcult.

The original paper did not make code publicly available and largely lacked

documentation. Only the gathered seeds were provided via GitHub (4). This made it necessary to

reproduce all the code from scratch.

In select instances, the paper crucially omitted important information, making us reliant on communi-

cation with the authors. This was most pronounced when aggregating embeddings or other metrics

across the bootstrapped model sampling, where vocabulary sizes were different. This meant that not

all models had good embeddings for all seed terms. We had to consider several different approaches

before settling on the averaging criteria described in Section 4.5.

Finally, preprocessing the data was more difﬁcult than initially imagined. The tokenization pipeline

in the original paper was vaguely speciﬁed, and differences in our implementation caused the slight

discrepancies in Table A.3. The POS tagging with spaCy was imperfect, resulting in the incorrect

9



tagging of several proper nouns as common nouns, making it hard to control for POS in random seed

generation.

Communication with original authors.

While the authors did not disclose any code, we main-

tained a lengthy email correspondence with them. One author, Maria Antoniak, was contacted to

clarify hyperparameters of the word2vec model, the methodology for generating random seeds across

bootstrapped models, and which bias metrics (PCA or WEAT) were used for different results. She

also described her dataset processing pipeline, as there were many alternate ways to process the

corpora before training.

7


## Conclusion


Overall, our results replicate the ones reported in the original paper. This lends strong support to

the general claim of the original paper that seed sets incorporate signiﬁcant inductive biases that

affect their performance as grounding for bias metrics and that researchers should be more cognizant

of these limitations. Aside from conﬁrming the danger of blindly using seed sets, we also provide

additional contributions. First of all, all code used to replicate the original paper is publicly available.

This code can obtain bias subspace vectors and assess seed set robustness. Secondly, we extended the

original paper’s set similarity versus bias subspace explained variance analysis to cover all datasets.

Furthermore, we implement multiple numbers of minimum frequencies that further enable results

across the entire vocabulary. Lastly, we provide an additional annotation pairing of the original seed


## dataset.


We have highlighted a need for carefully justifying the use of particular sets through empirical means,

but a theoretically sound and systematic method for doing so is still in its infancy. Further work

may explore what criteria seed sets should satisfy to demonstrate robustness. In addition, future

researchers may want to extend this work to bigram seed terms and embeddings to explore the

limitations of more expressive seeds and bias dimensions.

10




## References


[1] M. Antoniak and D. Mimno. Bad seeds: Evaluating lexical methods for bias measurement.

In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics

and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long

Papers), pages 1889–1904, Online, Aug. 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:

10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.148. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.148.

[2] T. Bolukbasi, K.-W. Chang, J. Y. Zou, V. Saligrama, and A. T. Kalai. Man is to Computer

Programmer as Woman is to Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings. In Advances in Neural

Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.

[3] A. Caliskan, J. J. Bryson, and A. Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from language

corpora contain human-like biases. Science, Apr. 2017. doi: 10.1126/science.aal4230. URL

https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aal4230. Publisher: American

Association for the Advancement of Science.

[4] K. Ethayarajh, D. Duvenaud, and G. Hirst.

Understanding undesirable word embedding

associations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06361, 2019.

[5] M. Honnibal, I. Montani, S. Van Landeghem, and A. Boyd. spaCy: Industrial-strength Natural

Language Processing in Python, 2020.

[6] K. Joseph, W. Wei, and K. M. Carley. Girls Rule, Boys Drool: Extracting Semantic and

Affective Stereotypes from Twitter. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer

Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW ’17, pages 1362–1374, New York,

NY, USA, Feb. 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 978-1-4503-4335-0. doi:

10.1145/2998181.2998187. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998187.

[7] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture models. CoRR,

abs/1609.07843, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.07843.

[8] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean. Distributed representations of

words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing

systems, pages 3111–3119, 2013.

[9] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin,

N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani,

S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-

performance deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-

Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32,

pages 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/

9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.

pdf.

[10] R. Rehurek and P. Sojka. Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora. In In

Proceedings of the LREC 2010 workshop on new challenges for NLP frameworks. Citeseer,

2010.

[11] R. Rudinger, C. May, and B. Van Durme. Social Bias in Elicited Natural Language Inferences. In

Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pages 74–79,

Valencia, Spain, 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W17-1609.

URL http://aclweb.org/anthology/W17-1609.

[12] M. Wan and J. McAuley. Item recommendation on monotonic behavior chains. In Proceedings

of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’18, page 86–94, New York,

NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450359016. doi: 10.1145/

3240323.3240369. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240369.

[13] M. Wan, R. Misra, N. Nakashole, and J. McAuley.

Fine-grained spoiler detection from

large-scale review corpora. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association

for Computational Linguistics, pages 2605–2610, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for

Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1248. URL https://aclanthology.org/

P19-1248.

11



A


## Appendix


0

20

40

60

80

100

Number of Seeds per Set

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Number of Sets per Paper

Figure A.1: Replication of Fig. 1 from the original paper, illustrating basic statistics of the gathered

seeds.

Table A.1: Comparing corpora summary statistics after preprocessing (original paper statistics

obtained from Table 2).


## Dataset


Total

Documents

Total Words

Vocabulary Size

Mean Document

Length

original

ours

original

ours

original

ours

original

ours

NYT

8,888

8,888

7,244,457

7,217,851

162,998

109,713

815

812

WikiText

28,472

28,472

99,197,146

87,077,718

546,828

228,318

3,484

3,058

Goodreads (Romance)

197,000

194,500

24,856,924

24,695,141

214,572

249,114

126

127

Goodreads (History/Biog)

136,000

135,000

14,324,947

14,168,742

163,171

193,012

105

105

Table A.2: Replication of Table 4 from the original paper. Seeds that are more semantically similar

have lower coherence scores. We use the WEAT metric (the difference between the mean vectors of

the seed sets) to generate the subspace and the NYT dataset embeddings for this data. We average

coherence scores across the n models (out of 20) that contain the paired seed sets and round to 3

decimal places. Unfortunately, while we tried to limit generated sets to only common nouns, proper

nouns and, more rarely, verbs appeared in the sets due to issues with the spaCy POS tagger.

Coherence

Generated Set A

Generated Set B

1.000

know, believe, think, guess, mean

governor, mayor, legislature, senator, democrat

1.000

foot-8, foot-7, foot-3, foot-5, to-4

rousteing, atkins, cornejo, ehrenreich, yorke

0.999

associate, assistant, economist, engineer, accountant

heels, shoes, pants, legs, ﬁngers

...

...

...

0.062

hertl, agnieszka, goran, brouwer, koivu

bases, wings, outs, scoreless, rockies

0.059

molina, glasser, pitney, darren, mackenzie

carver, mina, boyce, curator, deputy

0.053

lime, juice, lemon, potato, garlic

combo, bodysuit, raisin, koji, mango

Coherence

Gathered Set A

Gathered Set B

0.999

CAREER: executive, management, professio...

FAMILY: home, parents, children, famil...

0.968

MALE: brother, father, uncle, grandfat...

FEMALE: sister, mother, aunt, grandmot...

0.942

TERRORISM: terror, terrorism, violence,...

OCCUPATIONS: banker, carpenter, doctor,...

...

...

...

0.093

MALE NAMES: john, paul, mike, kevin, ...

FEMALE NAMES: amy, joan, lisa, sarah,...

0.053

NAMES BLACK: harris, robinson, howard, ...

NAMES WHITE: harris, nelson, robinson, ...

0.026

NAMES ASIAN: cho, wong, tang, huang, ...

NAMES CHINESE: chung, liu, wong, huang...

Table A.4: Seeds used in various Figures

Figures

Seed ID

Seeds

female-

Kozlowski_et_al_2019

[“woman", “women", “she", “her", “her", “hers", “girl",

“girls", “female", “feminine"]

female_1-

Caliskan_et_al_2017

[“sister", “female", “woman", “girl", “daughter", “she",

“hers", “her"]

Fig. 3

12



deﬁnitional_female-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

[“woman", “girl", “she", “mother", “daughter", “gal", “fe-

male", “her", “herself", “mary"]

female_singular-

Hoyle_et_al_2019

[“woman", “girl", “mother", “daughter", “sister", “wife",

“aunt", “niece", “empress", “queen", “princess", “duchess",

“lady", “dame", “waitress", “actress", “goddess", “police-

woman", “postwoman", “heroine", “witch", “stewardess",

“she"]

female_deﬁnition_words_2-

Zhao_et_al_2018

[“lady", “saleswoman", “noblewoman", “hostess", “co-

quette", “nun", “heroine", “actress", “chairwoman", “busi-

nesswoman", “spokeswoman", “waitress", “councilwoman",

“stateswoman", “policewoman", “countrywomen", “horse-

woman", “headmistress", “governess", “widow", “witch",

“ﬁancee"]

female_stereotype_words-

Zhao_et_al_2018

[“baker", “counselor", “nanny", “librarians", “socialite", “as-

sistant", “tailor", “dancer", “hairdresser", “cashier", “secre-

tary", “clerk", “stenographer", “optometrist", “housekeeper",

“bookkeeper", “homemaker", “nurse", “stylist", “reception-

ist"]

deﬁnitional_female-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

[“woman", “girl", “she", “mother", “daughter", “gal", “fe-

male", “her", “herself", “mary"]

deﬁnitional_male-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

[“man", “boy", “he", “father", “son", “guy", “male", “his",

“himself", “john"]

deﬁnitional_female-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

shufﬂed

["herself", "woman", "daughter", "mary", "her", "girl",

"mother", "she", "female", "gal"]

Fig. 2

deﬁnitional_male-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

shufﬂed

[ "man", "his", "he", "son", "guy", "himself", "father", "boy",

"male", "john"]

upperclass-

Kozlowski_et_al_2019

[“rich", “richer", “richest", “afﬂuence", “afﬂuent", “expen-

sive", “luxury", “opulent"]

lowerclass-

Kozlowski_et_al_2019

[“poor", “poorer", “poorest", “poverty", “impoverished", “in-

expensive", “cheap", “needy"]

upperclass-

Kozlowski_et_al_2019

shufﬂed

["richer", "opulent", "luxury", "afﬂuent", "rich", "afﬂuence",

"richest", "expensive" ]

lowerclass-

Kozlowski_et_al_2019

shufﬂed

[ "poorer", "impoverished", "poorest", "cheap", "needy",

"poverty", "inexpensive", "poor"]

names_chinese-

Garg_et_al_2018

[“chung", “liu", “wong", “huang", “ng", “hu", “chu", “chen",

“lin", “liang", “wang", “wu", “yang", “tang", “chang",

“hong", “li"]

names_hispanic-

Garg_et_al_2018

[“ruiz", “alvarez", “vargas", “castillo", “gomez", “soto",

“gonzalez", “sanchez", “rivera", “mendoza", “martinez", “tor-

res", “rodriguez", “perez", “lopez", “medina", “diaz", “gar-

cia", “castro", “cruz"]

names_chinese-

Garg_et_al_2018 shufﬂed

["tang", "chang", "chu", "yang", "wu","hong", "huang",

"wong", "hu", "liu", "lin", "chen", "liang", "chung", "li",

"ng", "wang"]

names_hispanic-

Garg_et_al_2018 shufﬂed

["ruiz", "rodriguez", "diaz", "perez", "lopez", "vargas", "al-

varez", "garcia","cruz", "torres", "gonzalez", "soto", "mar-

tinez", "medina", "rivera", "castillo", "castro", "mendoza",

"sanchez", "gomez"]

deﬁnitional_female-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

[“woman", “girl", “she", “mother", “daughter", “gal", “fe-

male", “her", “herself", “mary"]

deﬁnitional_male-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

[“man", “boy", “he", “father", “son", “guy", “male", “his",

“himself", “john"]

Fig. 1

13



Fig. A.2

deﬁnitional_female-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

shufﬂed

["female", "she", "woman", "gal", "her", "daughter", "girl",

"herself", "mother", "mary"]

deﬁnitional_male-

Bolukbasi_et_al_2016

shufﬂed

["john","man", "son","father", "male","himself", "guy","he",

"his","boy"]

random seeds 1

[“essential", “want", “suspension", “talked", “competitive",

“information", “hero", “bat", “seconds", “black"]

random seeds 2

[“derby", “passed", “achieve"„ “discussed", “providing", “re-

sulted", “inmates", “wearing", “bid", “rose"]

14



Table A.3: Computing power needed for each action in the replication process.

Action

Time (s)

RAM (MB)

Downloading the data

293

427

Preprocessing the data

3054

19018

Training all models

7806

21054

Table A.1

4274

661

Fig. 1

22

4363

Fig. 2

19

4370

Fig. 3

4

1510

Fig. 4

500

1610

legislature

global

0.39

0.34

0.33

0.32

0.32

0.32

0.31

0.31

0.31

0.38

0.37

0.37

0.36

0.36

0.35

0.35

0.35

0.34

0.33

-0.31

-0.32

-0.32

-0.32

-0.32

-0.32

-0.33

-0.35

-0.35

-0.38

represents

0.58

0.46

0.46

among

bill

assembly

bonds

treasury

securities

profile

ranking

reflecting

historically

alabama

chairwoman

0.4

0.38

0.38

0.37

0.36

0.36

0.35

-0.34

-0.34

-0.34

-0.35

-0.35

-0.35

-0.35

-0.37

-0.38

-0.38

labour

democratic

shareholder

revenue

leads

includes

gov

senate

impeachment

bond

morgan

include

domestic

0.3

-0.44

-0.45

-0.45

-0.45

-0.45

-0.45

-0.45

-0.46

-0.47

-0.49

2017

literally

lots

cooking

wonderful

quick

guns

dead

children

me

obama

whole

finding

we

clinton

divorce

girl

bathroom

weird

clothes

sisters

i

she

dog

boys

girls

these

constantly

my

her

beautiful

gender word

random word

shuffled gender

pairs

pairs

word pairs

Figure A.2: Extension on Fig. 4 from the original paper. Ranks words from the NYT corpus by

cosine similarity against different bias subspaces (2nd principal component), with NYT frequency

threshold 100.

15