Measuring Difﬁculty of Novelty Reaction

Ekaterina Nikonova, Cheng Xue, Vimukthini Pinto, Chathura Gamage, Peng Zhang, Jochen Renz

School of Computing, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia

ekaterina.nikonova, cheng.xue, vimukthini.inguruwattage, chathura.gamage, p.zhang, jochen.renz@anu.edu.au


## Abstract


the system can encounter is extremely large. Training a sys-

tem that could deal with all possible scenarios would require

an enormous amount of data and computational power. In-

stead, researchers should focus on designing and creating AI

systems that can quickly adapt to novel situations.

As researchers try to design systems that could efﬁciently

adapt to novel scenarios, it is also important to evaluate

such systems. Consider, the example of self-driving cars de-

scribed above. Assume that we now have two additional sys-

tems, one can also deal with oily roads and one that can drive

in snowy conditions. Which system is better? Is dealing with

sudden oil on the road a harder task than dealing with sud-

den snow? Can the knowledge of dealing with one novelty

be used in dealing with another novelty? When training an

AI system which novelty would be the easiest to train on

next? All of those questions require us to have a method to

measure or approximate the difﬁculty of the novelty before

the agent interacts with it.

In this paper, we propose a method that can be used to

approximate the difﬁculty of the novelty and predict how

hard dealing with this novelty will be for an AI system.

We designed different novelties, predicted their difﬁculty

and then evaluated several state-of-the-art novelty agents on

these novelties. We compare our difﬁculty predictions to the

actual results of these agents.

arXiv:2207.13857v1  [cs.AI]  28 Jul 2022

Current AI systems are designed to solve close-world prob-

lems with the assumption that the underlying world is remain-

ing more or less the same. However, when dealing with real-

world problems such assumptions can be invalid as sudden

and unexpected changes can occur. To effectively deploy AI-

powered systems in the real world, AI systems should be able

to deal with open-world novelty quickly. Inevitably, dealing

with open-world novelty raises an important question of nov-

elty difﬁculty. Knowing whether one novelty is harder to deal

with than another, can help researchers to train their systems

systematically. In addition, it can also serve as a measurement

of the performance of novelty robust AI systems. In this pa-

per, we propose to deﬁne the novelty reaction difﬁculty as a

relative difﬁculty of performing the known task after the in-

troduction of the novelty. We propose a universal method that

can be applied to approximate the difﬁculty. We present the

approximations of the difﬁculty using our method and show

how it aligns with the results of the evaluation of AI agents

designed to deal with novelty.


## Introduction


In recent years, signiﬁcant progress was made in the re-

search of Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems for closed-

world problems. As the result of this research, AI agents

have out-performed humans in many different video games

and tasks (8; 9). However, when deployed in the real-world,

such AI systems can usually only deal with tasks that closely

relate to their previous experience and have poor out-of-

domain generalization abilities (10). Moreover, if anything

changes in underlying task conditions, such systems would

need millions of training iterations to adapt to the novel sit-

uation. Retraining the system is often costly and requires

a lot of data or could be even impossible if an AI system

is deployed in the real world. Consider for example a self-

driving car that suddenly encounters spilled motor oil on the

road. The system would only be allowed to use a very small

number of iterations and would have to quickly adapt to the

changed road conditions in order to keep its passengers safe.

Naturally, pre-training a system on the oily road data would

help, however, the number of possible novel situations that


## Related Work


Historically, the difﬁculty of a task is something that is usu-

ally deﬁned by some hand-crafted rules (3) or is agent-

dependent. However, when those difﬁculty rules are un-

known or one would like to evaluate several different agents,

a method to predict the general agent-independent difﬁculty

of the task is needed. Thus, for example, knowing the dif-

ﬁculty of the task before the agent’s interaction can help to

select the next task to learn in hierarchical learning (4), rein-

forcement learning (3) or open-world learning (5). In open-

world learning, there were several attempts to formalize the

novelty and its difﬁculty (6; 7). However, while having good

theoretical results, previous approaches have practical limi-

tations such as the need of having an optimal agent (6) which

could be hard to obtain. In this paper, we propose a more

practical approach to measure the difﬁculty. We measure the

reaction difﬁculty in terms of the difference of the solution

spaces of a task in previously known and in novel condi-

Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial

Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.



Novelty:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Distance:

0.76

0.46

-0.15

-0.16

0.26

0.29

0.22

-0.10

0.28

0.43

0.23

-0.03

Difﬁculty:

H

H

E

E

M

M

M

E

M

H

M

E

Pass % Diff.:

-35

-13

+20

-5

-7

-9

-19

-13

-17

-10

-2

-7

Table 1: Average distance between solution spaces of the sampled pre-novel and post-novel levels, predicted difﬁculty E-easy,

M-medium and H-hard, and average passing rate change (in percentage) of the tested novelty dealing agents. Numbers in bold

indicate that predicted and observed difﬁculty have matched.

particular, we deﬁne PA = {PA1, PA2, ...PAi} and PB =

{PB1, PB2, ...PBj}, where PA1 means all solutions of the

pre-novel world A with only one action.

We then deﬁne the distance between each partition as:

tions. While measuring the difﬁculty of a task in terms of

the solution spaces has been used before (2; 1) to the best of

our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work to apply it to measure

the difﬁculty of open-world novelty.

i,j dn(pAi, pBj)

D(PAn, PBn) =

(|PAn| −|PBn|) + P

Novelty Reaction Difﬁculty

max(|PA|, |PB|)

,

(2)

where i ∈{1, 2, ..., min(|PA|, |PB|)}, and where j

∈

{j| dn(pAi, pBj) = min(dn(pAi, pBn))∀pBn ∈PBn}.

Finally, given all of the deﬁnitions above, we deﬁne the

novelty reaction difﬁculty as the distance between two solu-

tion spaces PA and PB:

D(PA, PB) =

P

n D(PAn, PBn)

max(|PA|, |PB|)

(3)

which measures the distance between the solution spaces in

terms of the solution space shifts and size differences. Our

distance measure was inspired by Hausdorff distance. How-

ever, in our case the set size difference is also important as

if the novelty reduces the number of possible solutions it

should be considered to be more difﬁcult than the novelty

that does not. As Hausdorff distance does not consider this

difference, we propose our own distance function that is sim-

ilar to Hausdorff distance but also considers the size differ-

ence.

Given a ﬁnite world, we can approximate the solution

space using random sampling agents. As the number of sam-

pling agents increases (i.e. n →∞), the entire solution

space will be explored. However, often, the solution space is

too large to explore entirely and only approximation is pos-

sible. In this paper, we use 50 randomly initialized agents

that explore the pre-novel and post-novel solution spaces for

100 episodes. We then use the collected solutions as approx-

imations of the solution spaces of pre-novel and post-novel

worlds and compute the distance between them.

Figure 1: An example of solution space difference. Here

white nodes are states, black nodes are actions, and the green

leaf nodes are ﬁnal states of a solution.

In this paper, we deﬁne the reaction difﬁculty to be a rel-

ative difﬁculty of completing a known task after introducing

novelty. We measure the difﬁculty of the introduced novelty

using the distance between pre-novel and post-novel solu-

tion spaces (Figure 1).

We deﬁne A to be a ﬁnite pre-novel world that an agent

has trained on, and let B be a ﬁnite (post-novel) world with

the introduced novelty. Let S be a set of all states of the given

world, r(sn) be a binary reward function which assigns 0 or

1 to each terminal state sn, and t = (a1, a2, ..., an−1) be a

sequence of actions. We deﬁne a sequence of actions t to be

a solution p if and only if that sequence of actions leads to a

terminal state sn such that r(sn) = 1.

We deﬁne the solution space of the pre-novel world A to

be PA = {pA

1 , pA

2 , ..., pA

i } and the solution space of the post-

novel world B to be PB = {pB

1 , pB

2 , ..., pB

j }, where i may

equal to j or not.

Further, we deﬁne a distance between two solutions pA

x

and pB

y that contains n actions as:

Experiments

In our experiments, we use Science Birds as the testing envi-

ronment. Science Birds is a clone of Angry Birds - a popular

video game. The goal of Science Birds is to destroy all pigs

in the game level while also maximizing the overall score.

In our setting, we have a number of generated Science Birds

levels. We then randomly sample those levels to produce a

set of ”base” levels. We then introduce a predeﬁned novelty

to those base levels and use them to estimate the difﬁculty.

In our evaluation, we have a total of 12 novelties that we

test. To measure the difﬁculty of each novelty we have ran-

domly sampled 100 base levels and introduce the novelty to

dn(pA

x , pB

y ) =

Pn

i=1 ||aA

i −aB

i ||

n ∗maxa

,

(1)

where maxa is the maximum possible distance between

two actions, so that d(pA

x , pB

y ) ∈[0, 1].

In order to compute the difﬁculty, we ﬁrst partition the

solutions according to the length of action sequences. In



Difﬁculty:

Easy

Medium

Hard

Pass % in novel games:

0.3946

0.3874

0.2214

is more practical and can be easily applied to other domains

where the difﬁculty of the novelty can be measured by the

difference in the solution spaces.

Table 2: Average pass percentage in novel game against pre-

dicted difﬁculty of the novelty.


## References


[1] Weissgerber K., Lamont G., B., Borghetti B., J. & Pe-

terson G., L. Determining solution space character-

istics for real-time strategy games and characterizing

winning strategies. International Journal Of Computer

Games Technology, 2011.

each level. Then given two sets of levels with and without

novelty, we run n random agents on each pair of the lev-

els to collect the solutions for the post and pre-novel levels.

Once the solutions are collected, we compute the distance

between the solution spaces using our method and classify

12 novelties into easy, medium, and hard difﬁculty. We de-

ﬁne a novelty to be easy when D(PA, PB) <= 0, medium

when 0 < D(PA, PB) <= 0.3 and hard otherwise.

Once the novelties are assigned their difﬁculty, we run

state-of-the-art novelty reaction agents on all novelties using

a bigger set of levels (> 1000 levels per novelty) to see if

their performance matches our difﬁculty predictions.

The results for each of the 12 evaluated novelties are dis-

played in Table 1. As it can be seen in Table 1 the average

distance between the solution spaces and the predicted dif-

ﬁculty matches the observed passing rates of the agents in

the majority of the cases. We note that while two novelties,

novelty 8 and novelty 11 were classiﬁed as easy and medium

respectively, the actual agent’s evaluation showed that their

difﬁculties should be swapped. We hypothesize that those

two novelties were misclassiﬁed due to the randomness of

the sampling agents or due to the limited number of levels

that were sampled to measure the difﬁculty. We hypothe-

size that increasing the number of sampling agents or the

number of sampled levels will increase the accuracy of the

approximations and difﬁculty predictions. Another possible

improvement would be to use a more sophisticated explo-

ration strategy to sample the solution spaces.

Despite misclassiﬁcation of individual novelties difﬁcul-

ties, on average, the predicted level of difﬁculty matched the

average passing rate as shown in Table 2.

Thus, we can conclude that despite a relatively small num-

ber of sampled levels, our method was able to predict the

difﬁculty of the novelties for the agents with high accuracy.

[2] Hermes, P., Mulder, M., Paassen, M., Boering, J. &

Huisman, H. Solution-Space-Based Complexity Anal-

ysis of the Difﬁculty of Aircraft Merging Tasks. Jour-

nal Of Aircraft, 46 pp. 1995-2015, 2009.

[3] Zhang, Y. & Goh, W. Personalized task difﬁculty adap-

tation based on reinforcement learning. User Model.

User Adapt. Interact., 31 pp. 753-784, 2021.

[4] Pateria, S., Subagdja, B., Tan, A. & Quek, H. Hierar-

chical Reinforcement Learning. ACM Computing Sur-

veys (CSUR), 54 pp. 1 - 35, 2021.

[5] Bendale, A. & Boult, T. Towards Open World Recogni-

tion. 2015 IEEE Conference On Computer Vision And

Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1893-1902, 2015.

[6] Boult, T., Grabowicz, P., Prijatelj, D., Stern, R., Holder,

L., Alspector, J., Jafarzadeh, M., Ahmad, T., Dhamija,

A., C.Li, Cruz, S., Shrivastava, A., Vondrick, C. &

Scheirer, W. A Unifying Framework for Formal Theo-

ries of Novelty: Framework, Examples and Discussion.

ArXiv, abs/2012.04226, 2020.

[7] Muhammad, F., Sarathy, V., Tatiya, G., Goel, S.,

Gyawali, S., Guaman, M., Sinapov, J. & Scheutz

A Novelty-Centric Agent Architecture for Changing

Worlds. AAMAS, 2021.

[8] Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W., Math-

ieu, M., Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D., Powell, R.,

Ewalds, T., Georgiev, P., Oh, J., Horgan, D., Kroiss,

M., Danihelka, I., Huang, A., Sifre, L., Cai, T., Aga-

piou, J., Jaderberg, M., Vezhnevets, A., Leblond, R.,

Pohlen, T., Dalibard, V., Budden, D., Sulsky, Y., Mol-

loy, J., Paine, T., Gulcehre, C., Wang, Z., Pfaff, T., Wu,

Y., Ring, R., Yogatama, D., W¨unsch, D., McKinney,

K., Smith, O., Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T., Kavukcuoglu,

K., Hassabis, D., Apps, C. & Silver, D. Grandmaster

level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement

learning. Nature. pp. 1-5, 2019.


## Conclusions


In this paper, we have proposed a solution space-based


## method to measure the difﬁculty of the novelty. We deﬁned


novelty reaction difﬁculty as a relative difﬁculty of deal-

ing with the previously known task after the introduction of

the novelty. We have evaluated our difﬁculty approximation


## method on several novelties and compared the predicted dif-


ﬁculties to the passing rates of the agents that are able to

adapt to the novelty. The empirical results show that on av-

erage there is a correlation between agent’s passing rates and

the predicted difﬁculty. Moreover, our results show that the

average passing rates decrease as the predicted difﬁculty in-

creases.

While solution space-based analysis was used in previ-

ous work, to the best of our knowledge were are the ﬁrst to

apply it to determine the difﬁculty of open-world novelties.

Compared to the previous approach, our difﬁculty measure

[9] Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C., Guez, A.,

Sifre, L., Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou,

I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S.,

Grewe, D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I.,

Lillicrap, T., Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T.

& Hassabis, D. Mastering the game of Go with deep

neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529 pp. 484-

489, 2016.

[10] Paduraru, C., Mankowitz, D., Dulac-Arnold, G., Li, J.,

Levine, N., Gowal, S. Hester, T. Challenges of real-



world reinforcement learning: deﬁnitions, benchmarks

and analysis. Mach. Learn., 110 pp. 2419-2468, 2021.