Prototype-Based Interpretability for Legal Citation Prediction

Chu Fei Luo∗1,2, Rohan Bhambhoria∗1,2, Samuel Dahan2,3, and Xiaodan Zhu1,2

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Ingenuity Labs Research Institute

Queen’s University

2Conflict Analytics Lab, Queen’s University

3Cornell Law School

{14cfl,r.bhambhoria,samuel.dahan,xiaodan.zhu}@queensu.ca


## Abstract


Deep learning has made significant progress in

the past decade, and demonstrates potential to

solve problems with extensive social impact.

In high-stakes decision making areas such as

law, experts often require interpretability for

automatic systems to be utilized in practical set-

tings. In this work, we attempt to address these

requirements applied to the important problem

of legal citation prediction (LCP). We design

the task with parallels to the thought-process

of lawyers, i.e., with reference to both prece-

dents and legislative provisions. After initial

experimental results, we refine the target ci-

tation predictions with the feedback of legal

experts. Additionally, we introduce a prototype

architecture to add interpretability, achieving

strong performance while adhering to decision

parameters used by lawyers. Our study builds

on and leverages the state-of-the-art language

processing models for law, while addressing

vital considerations for high-stakes tasks with

practical societal impact.

arXiv:2305.16490v1  [cs.CL]  25 May 2023

Figure 1: Legal professionals make decisions grounded

in (1) Precedents, and (2) Provisions of Legislation. Sur-

rounding context also has a strong influence in determin-

ing the ground truth which is represented by <mask>.

key problem, citation prediction, which aims to pre-

dict the most fitting legal citation for a text passage.

Legal citation (Paul et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2020) is

a fundamental component of a lawyer’s argument

construction process. Unlike in other domains, cita-

tions in law are not just used to reference previous

works. They serve to indicate “the nature of the

authority upon which a statement is based" (Axel-

Lute, 1982). Court rules go so far as to authorize

judges to reject arguments that are not supported

by cited authority, and lawyers who appeal on the

basis of arguments for which they have cited no au-

thority can be sanctioned (Martin, 2020). For this

reason, any system built to address this high-stakes

task must also present evidence to properly support

the quality of legal argumentation.

Existing works on legal citation-based tasks

(Paul et al., 2022) do not adhere to the thought-

process employed by lawyers, leading to discrep-

ancies or overlap with existing tasks such as legal

1


## Introduction


Deep learning has made significant progress in

the past decade. Researchers have begun applying

state-of-the-art methods to problems with extensive

social impact, which in turn brings about many crit-

ical challenges for these deep learning models. In

high-stakes problems, it is essential to understand

whether models follow the same reasoning as do-

main experts or practitioners, and if not, why these

models arrive at their final outcomes (Arrieta et al.,

2020). Decisions, in other words, often require

human comprehensibility for experts to validate

and trust their correctness (Belle and Papantonis,

2021).

The field of law is one such high-stakes domain

where decision making processes often have a sig-

nificant societal impact. In this paper, we study a

∗Equal contribution.



judgment prediction. Specifically, existing works

primarily predict legal citations solely from the

facts of a case. While facts are important to un-

derstand a situation, lawyers often develop a legal

argument by translating facts in an abstract legal

problem first. In other words, citations draw from

legal reference to strengthen the lawyer’s position

in court. Many citations are not made to ascertain

the nature of the violation. They are instead de-

cided by an understanding of the legal issue the

lawyer wants to address, as well as how it relates to

prior literature and provisions available in the law.

In this research, we propose a new definition for

this task called Legal Citation Prediction (LCP).

This new approach for citation prediction, illus-

trated in Figure 1 and described in Section 3.1, aims

to mimic a lawyer’s reasoning by providing prior

literature, hereby referred to as precedents, and

provisions of legislature, provisions, as input. To

address the critical issue of interpretability, we ex-

tend a prototype-based architecture to better serve

the requirements of this task (Zhang et al., 2021).

Utilizing prototypes allows the model to formulate

representative examples of each citation and draw

similarities to legal references. To the best of our

knowledge, this work represents the first attempt to

use prototype-based interpretability for language

model tuning towards a high-stakes legal task.

The main contributions of this work include:

to learning how machine/deep learning may

be more safely deployed in high-stakes fields.

2


## Related Work


Citation Prediction

The task of citation predic-

tion has been extensively studied in academic lit-

erature. For scholarly works, citations serve as a


## method of information search; this is valuable in


identifying trends in a given area of research (Yu

et al., 2012). The citation frequency of documents

can serve as a proxy of that work’s influence, which

allows for statistical analysis of the trends in the

broader community (Hou et al., 2019). Citation

networks are also used in industry to measure adop-

tion of academic methods (Kim et al., 2016), and

in the public sector for allocation of funds by gov-

ernmental organizations (Leydesdorff et al., 2019).

Most works formulate citation prediction as link

prediction on the citation network (Yu et al., 2012;

Liu et al., 2019a), leveraging semantic information

from the document texts as well as metadata such

as authors and venue (Shibata et al., 2012).

For legal citation tasks, prior research uses aca-

demic citation prediction or information retrieval

techniques, which we refer to as Legal Citation

Recommendation (Huang et al., 2021; Dadgostari

et al., 2021). Huang et al. (2021), in particular,

explored limiting the context given as input to im-

prove the performance of their works. Although

we derive insights from Legal Citation Recommen-

dation research, these studies do not utilize either

prior literature or provisions of legislation.

Another approach is followed by Sadeghian et al.

(2018), where the authors construct a heteroge-

neous citation network from a legal corpus and

attempt to predict links as the purpose of a citation.

Other works (Xu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019;

Wang et al., 2019) also consider legal citation pre-

diction as a type of Legal Judgment Prediction task,

where they identify statutes violation from facts

as a proxy to the final judgment of the case. We

refer to this formulation of the task as Legal Statute

Identification (LSI) based on previous work (Paul

et al., 2022). Formally, it is either a multi-label

document classification task or an inductive link

prediction task that predicts statutes on the basis of

the facts of a situation. However, while the facts

are crucial to formulate a legal argument, citations

serve primarily to support a lawyer’s arguments.

As such, they should not be treated as indicative of

the final judgment. We adopt a multi-label classi-

• Defining a new task of Legal Citation Pre-

diction (LCP), enhanced with feedback from

legal experts. We compare performance be-

fore and after factoring in legal significance,

illustrating the importance and benefits of mul-

tidisciplinary collaboration.

• Implementing a prototype architecture that ap-

proaches this task with the goal of making the

model interpretable. It is the first time that

this method is being used in a legal applica-

tion. We introduce a modified loss component

which is capable of strengthening parallels to

a lawyer’s thought-process.

• Conducting a thorough analysis on the prac-

ticality of this task, providing empirical evi-

dence comparing utility to performance. Addi-

tionally, we conduct input perturbations to an-

alyze the learned latent space. As the work is a

joint effort of NLP researchers and law practi-

tioners, we also hope it reflects and contributes



architectures add interpretability by basing their

predictions on similarity to “prototypes", which are

representative training samples for each target label.

Our proposed architecture enhances interpretabil-

ity and grounds the model decision in a lawyer’s

thought process via a customized loss function that

considers precedents and provisions as compar-

ison points. For our LCP task, we use a combi-

nation of automatically discovered prototypes for

precedents and manually chosen prototypes for pro-

visions. We use vanilla fine-tuning as a baseline,

where we append a linear classification head to a

pre-trained language model and fine-tune all pa-

rameters with multi-class cross-entropy loss, only

using the case text as input. At this stage, we also

explore performance tradeoffs of task configura-

tions such as limiting text spans and the number of

target labels. We also incorporate expert feedback

from initial results to adjust the experiment param-

eters. Then, we fine-tune from the base pre-trained

model while adding our prototype-based custom

loss objective, encouraging an interpretable latent

space organized around precedents and provisions.

We explore performance trade-offs and the learned

embedding space through perturbations.

fication setting in this work, but we do not restrict

the input to the facts of a case.

Interpretability

One significant challenge that

has been insufficiently addressed in legal citation

work is interpretability. Interpretability is a key

requirement of AI systems applied to law, as ar-

gued in previous studies (Górski and Ramakrishna,

2021). Fulfilling interpretability requirements in-

creases trust in machine learning systems. This, in

turn, fosters broader adoption and stimulates fur-

ther development of applied AI research (Rudin,

2019). In the legal field, there are many problems

and tasks that can benefit from NLP models (Zhong

et al., 2020b). These include legal decision mak-

ing (Bhambhoria et al., 2022), judgment prediction

(Zhong et al., 2020a), and similar charge disam-

biguation (Liu et al., 2021).

In general, there are many techniques to explain

or interpret a model post-hoc, i.e. after training

(Ribeiro et al., 2016; Covert et al., 2020). How-

ever, these methods can be unfaithful to the original

model and insufficient for specialized, high-stakes

tasks (Luo et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2022). Conse-

quently, it is important to integrate interpretabil-

ity into the model’s architecture during the train-

ing process with ante-hoc methods. Bhambhoria

et al. (2022), for example, explored inherent inter-

pretability in a legal decision making task, which

enabled lawyers to contribute to model design from

an early stage. Very few works have applied state-

of-the-art models to legal citation prediction (Paul

et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2020), and none have pro-

posed solutions for inherent interpretability.

Prototype-based models are successful in various

settings, such as few-shot learning, but many works

have adapted them to be used for interpretability

in both NLP and computer vision (Zhang et al.,

2021; Chen et al., 2019). Among existing ante-

hoc techniques is ProtGNN (Zhang et al., 2021),

a graph-based architecture that makes predictions

based on similarity to “prototypes", i.e. represen-

tative training samples for each target label. In

this work, we adapt the prototype architecture to

provide interpretability for legal citation prediction.

3.1

Defining Legal Citation Prediction

We define Legal Citation Prediction (LCP) as a

multi-label classification based on the input text, as

well as the provisions and precedents for our target

citations. For a passage of text x ∈X, and a set

of possible target citation labels L, where |L| = n,

the goal is to predict the subset of appropriate target

citations y ∈L, represented as an n-dimensional

vector.

A critical motivation for LCP is the thought pro-

cess lawyers undertake when finding citations for

their work. Similar to scholarly citations, lawyers

attempt to find the most relevant precedent to

strengthen their own arguments (Savelka and Ash-

ley, 2021). When lawyers present a legal argument

and judges write opinions, they package their in-

terpretation of what the law is and how it should

be applied to a given situation. During this pro-

cess, lawyers make reference to statutes, regula-

tions, court rules, as well as prior appellate deci-

sions they believe to be pertinent and supporting.

We define provisions as pieces of written law, such

as statutes, regulations, and court rules, and prece-

dents to be prior appellate decisions made in court.

Various legal systems apply provisions and prece-

3

Prototype-Based Legal Citation

Prediction

We propose a prototype-based architecture to ad-

dress the task of Legal Citation Prediction. The

full task is described in Section 3.1, and our ar-

chitecture is shown in Figure 2. Prototype-based



Figure 2: An overview of our architecture. ELM is a RoBERTa-base encoder. The black dot represents the

embedding of the input text with surrounding context. Pink dots represent embeddings of precedents. Green dots

represent embeddings of provisions. Together, the green and pink dots form the prototypes. D is used to denote

the L2 normalized distance between the prototypes and the input embedding. Calculated scores based on the

aforementioned distances is denoted by S(Di

P reced/P rovis). The scores are passed through a feedforward layer,

FLM to obtain the top scoring provision.

Algorithm 1 Prototype formulation algorithm for

prototypes pj ∈P, and target citation labels lj ∈

L. ELM denotes a language model encoder, cos

is cosine similarity, and Cluster is any clustering

algorithm that can produce centroids C.

dents in varying scales of importance. For example,

common law is distinguished by its use of promi-

nent appellate decisions, also known as caselaw.

These two components have distinct characteristics,

in the same way the definition of a word and its

appearance in a sentence can inform the word’s us-

age in different ways. Existing works have strictly

used prior appellate decisions, or strictly used the

source text, but we theorize making both available

can provide more context to citation prediction. In

addition to the input text x, we also make available

the target provisions to be cited, Provis, and rel-

evant precedents, Preced, taken to be other text

passages with the same target citation in the train-

ing set. We automatically sample representative

precedents in this work, described in Section 3.2.

Require: Training dataset {xi, yi}n

i=1 ∈X, Pos-

sible cited provisions l ∈L

1: Encode all samples f(xi) = ELM(xi)[0]

2: for l ∈L do

3:

Xl = xi ∈X | yi(l) = 1

4:

Cl = Cluster(f(Xl))

5:

for cl,j ∈Cl do

6:

xl,j = argminx∈Xl cos(f(x), cl,j)

7:

if cos(f(xl,j), cl,j) > smin then

8:

pj = f(xl,j)

9:

else

10:

pj = cl,j

11:

end if

3.2

Training Prototypes

The prototype construction process is described in

Algorithm 1. First, we encode the entire training

set into the latent space. Then, for each target

provision in the legislation, we find the subset of

training samples that contain a citation to that text,

denoted by Xl. We then cluster Xl with k-means,

taking the centroids as prototype candidates Cl.

For each candidate, we try to locate the closest

training sample by cosine similarity xl,j. If the

similarity exceeds a chosen threshold smin, we

update the candidate to match the embedding of

xl,j. Otherwise, we take the candidate as the final

prototype to be used in training.

For a batch of n samples, with input embeddings

f(x) for input x, and a feed-forward classification

head c, the loss is denoted by L in Equation 1.

The input embedding f(x) is taken as the CLS

token, and similarity scores S are calculated with

the similarity score described in Equation 2. We

12:

end for

13: end for

add L2 normalization to the distance metric from

previous work (Zhang et al., 2021), where pk is

the prototype, h is the embedding output of f(xi),

and ϵ is a regularizing weight. Also, we use the

standard binary cross-entropy loss for multi-label

classification.

n

X

L = 1

i=1

BCELoss (c ◦S ◦f (xi) , yi)

n

(1)

+λDpreced + δDprovis

log



∥pk −h∥2

2 + 1

2

S = sim (pk, h) =

∥pk −h∥2

2 + ϵ

(2)



25000

U.S. Code

Ann. 1 Ann. 2 Ann. 3

20000

42 §1988

1.5

1

2

28 §1404

1

1.5

2.5

Citation Frequency

15000

Table 1: Expert feedback study results. Three legal

experts (Ann. 1, Ann. 2, Ann. 3) were provided 4

samples citing a provision of U.S. code, and asked to

rate the relevance of the passage text to the citation on a

scale of 3.

10000

5000

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Citation

All precedents are represented in the loss as

DPreced with a similar formulation to the previ-

ous work, (Zhang et al., 2021). In this work, we

extend the loss by adding a new term, DProvis to

represent legislation provisions. We also establish

the existing loss terms with coefficients of λ to

represent precedents, as shown in Equation 3.

Figure 3: Distribution of documents citing the top 100

most frequently occurring provisions.

use vanilla fine-tuning for all preliminary experi-

ments. With just the case text as input, we append a

linear classification head to a pre-trained language

model (depicted as ELM in Figure 2), and fine-

tune all parameters with multi-class cross-entropy

loss. At this stage, we also explore performance

tradeoffs of task configurations such as limiting

text spans and the number of target labels. We

choose LegalBERT for our architecture as it outper-

forms RoBERTa and has equivalent performance

to Longformer for lower computational cost.

n

X

Dpreced = λ1

1

n

i=1

min

j:pj∈Pyi

∥f (xi) −pj∥2

2

n

X

+ λ2(−1

i=1

min

j:pj /∈Pyi

∥f (xi) −pj∥2

2)

n

C

X

X

max (0, cos (pi, pj) −smax)

+ λ3

4.2


## Dataset


i̸=j

pi,pj∈Pk

k=1

We built a dataset of court opinions, hereby re-

ferred to as the PACER dataset, constructed from

United States federal court documents curated by

the Free Law Project1. This data has been used

in previous works (Dadgostari et al., 2021). How-

ever, we download and preprocess the data from

scratch. These documents are derived from 1276

jurisdictions in the United States of America, rang-

ing from the federal Supreme Court to local district

or municipal courts. We downloaded the files via

the Free Law Project’s CourtListener bulk API on

February 10, 2022. For this work, we focus on pre-

dicting provisions of the U.S. Code. The provision

source text associated with each target citation is

retrieved from the Legal Information Institute (LII)

maintained by Cornell Law School2. The gold la-

bels are automatically extracted from the text via

regex. We remove documents that do not contain

any U.S. Code citations, and filter for documents

that contain at least one of the top 100 most fre-

quently cited subsections, for a total of 175,741

documents. Each opinion cites an average of 3.02

U.S. Code provisions, and each provision has an

average of 5308.51 citing opinions. This is divided

(3)

n

X

Dprovis = 1

i=1

min

j:dj∈Dyi

∥f (xi) −dj∥2

2

(4)

n

The λ1 term is used to encourage embeddings to

move closer to a prototype cluster of their class,

where f(xi) is the embedding representation of

the input xi, pj ∈Pyi is the set of prototypes be-

longing to all provisions of legislation cited yi, and

n is the batch size. In contrast, the λ2 encour-

ages embeddings to move away from prototypes of

different classes, scored similarly to λ1 but using

pj /∈Pyi. The λ3 term moves prototypes of the

same class further away from each other, punish-

ing prototypes that have a cosine similarity above

a threshold smax. DProvis is defined similarly to

the λ1 term, as shown in Equation 4, and serves a

similar purpose of encouraging input embeddings

to be closer to the provision source text embedding.

4

Experimental Settings

4.1

Encoder Model Selection

Preliminary experiments are summarized in Table 2.

Please refer to Appendix A.2 for model details. We

1https://free.law/

2https://www.law.cornell.edu/



Model

5 labels

20 labels

100 labels

Macro-f1 Micro-f1 Macro-f1 Micro-f1 Macro-f1 Micro-f1

RoBERTa

51.6

49.5

55.0

59.6

34.4

45.2

LegalBERT

54.4

49.4

55.1

60.7

32.9

44.8

Longformer

53.6

51.3

56.0

58.8

33.7

44.9

Table 2: A summary of preliminary experiments to choose the encoder pretrained language model and sets of target

citations. We report Macro- and Micro-F1 scores, and all experiments report a single run.

into a 80:5:15 train, validation, and test split ratio.

The dataset label distribution is long-tailed, with

the most frequently cited U.S. code appearing more

than twice as often as the next. The label imbalance

can be observed in Figure 3.

prediction targets.

With the assistance of a legal expert, we man-

ually removed procedural citations from the top

100 automatically chosen targets. A second ex-

pert was consulted to validate the filtering and sort

ambiguous categories. We kept definitions as rel-

evant, since they do not form a legal basis but are

important to building an argument. We consid-

ered government regulations, such as allowance

administration expense, to be adjacent to procedu-

ral citations and removed them as well. Of the top

100 citations, 55 (55%) of them are procedural; of

the top 20, 15 (75%) are procedural.

Expert Feedback

We sought to obtain feedback

on the PACER dataset and prototype discovery

from legal experts. After conducting preliminary

experiments, further described in Section 4.1, we

performed one iteration of our prototype discovery

process on the best-performing checkpoints. We

encoded the train set with RoBERTa (Liu et al.,

2019b), clustered the embeddings, then found ex-

ample cases in the training set closest to the cluster

centroids by cosine similarity.

We then showed four examples and their provi-

sion source text to three legal experts, including

the source text of the provision and the full court

opinion, and asked them to rate the relevance of the

provision citation to the original case. The legal

experts were asked to rate each example on a scale

of 3, where 3 is highly relevant and 1 is completely

irrelevant, and the results are summarized in Table


## 1. Overall, the average rating of the four examples


was 1.5 — i.e. the relevance of the prototypes is rel-

atively low. Responses for one example are shown

in Table 7 of Appendix C.

The legal experts stated in a follow-up interview

that this was due to the target citations L. We chose

frequency of citation as an indication of importance,

but citations serve different purposes, as mentioned

in previous work (Sadeghian et al., 2018). Other

legal citation tasks manually choose prediction tar-

gets based on significance (Paul et al., 2022), or use

citations that serve a specific purpose, like caselaw

(Dadgostari et al., 2021). Many of the citations we

automatically targeted were procedural; they de-

fine proper procedures in court proceedings, such

as appropriate legal fees, but are not relevant to

the legal argument being made. The lawyers gave

low ratings because the citations were not valuable

4.3

Surrounding Text Span Context

The definition of the Legal Citation Prediction task

implicitly suggests we are only concerned with the

portions of a document that are relevant to the ci-

tation. This differs from focusing on the course

of events that led to a potential violation of a law.

Also, the 512 token limit in some of our pre-trained

language models like RoBERTa is a significant lim-

itation when parsing longer legal documents. We

theorize that the surrounding context within a doc-

ument is more important for a citation, which may

contain opinions and arguments alongside facts of

the situation, as discussed in previous works (Yu

et al., 2012). To address this issue in our work, we

filter document sentences by the surrounding con-

text of our target citations, i.e. taking n sentences

before and after a citation sentence. For example,

±2 implies for a sentence of the input that contains

a citation sc ∈xi, we retain the 2 sentences before

and after in the sequence {..., s1, s2, sc, s3, s4, ...},


## resulting in 5 sentences total. Table 6 in Appendix


B illustrates how this preprocessing significantly

reduces document length. With ±2 context, the

mean document length is below the token limit.

We do not always classify all 100 target citations.

Some experiments remove labels to handle dataset

imbalance, and others to reflect the feedback of

legal experts, as described in Section 4.2. In the



Context

20 labels

100 labels

45 labels

Macro-f1 Micro-f1 Macro-f1 Micro-f1 Macro-f1 Micro-f1

N/A

55.1

60.7

32.9

44.8

43.4

50.9

±4

66.7

68.9

50.3

58.8

68.7

73.7

±2

68.9

71.1

55.7

62.0

69.5

74.9

Table 3: A summary of vanilla fine-tuning performance with different input contexts and target citation sets. N/A

refers to the setting where no context is taken, and we only classify on the first 512 tokens of a document.

case where a document does not contain any of

the target citations, we randomly sample sentences

until there is a minimum of 15 selected.

lows a similar trend, and performance falls between

20 labels and 100 labels. However, once we pro-

vide surrounding context to the model, we see a sig-

nificant increase in performance, with ±4 and ±2

both improving over the baseline by 23-25 points in

both Macro- and Micro-F1. Compared to the other

settings that exhibit 15-22 points in F1 improve-

ment, it is clear that context is more important with

legally relevant citations, or procedural citations

are more likely to be mentioned in the first 512

tokens.

5


## Results and Analyses


Baseline


## Results of our baseline experiments


with vanilla fine-tuning are shown in Table 3. The

purpose of these experiments is to determine the op-

timal number of surrounding sentences to provide

as input context during training, and also to exam-

ine the effects of target labels on performance. Re-

moving rarer classes helps alleviate the challenge

of the long-tail imbalance in the dataset, as discov-

ered in previous works (Ma et al., 2020). However,

one of the challenges of law is the vast citation

network; therefore, it is important to investigate

model performance over as many possible citations

as possible. From the preliminary experiments in

Table 2, we observe that all models demonstrate

slightly higher prediction accuracy with 20 labels

compared to 5, but the performance decreases sig-

nificantly with 100 labels.To this end, we continue

further experiments with 20 labels and 100 labels.

We add a 45-label setting with only non-procedural

citations based on expert feedback in Section 4.2.

Under the 20-label setting, we observe that in-

puts without context filtering and naively taking

the beginning of a document results in the worst

performance. Providing context of 4 sentences pre-

ceding and following the required citation, denoted

by ±4, leads to better results. Finally, by includ-

ing ±2 sentences for context, we obtain the best

performance. As expected, we observe lower F1

scores for 100 labels due to the increase in rare

classes. For subsequent experiments, we maintain

20 labels as the baseline for the following reasons:


## 1) We observe strong empirical evidence for this


setting, and 2) The number of labels corresponds to

a reasonable number of outcomes which can corre-

spond to prior filtering by legal professionals, and

our system would help with disambiguation.

The performance of 45 labels without context fol-

Prototype-based Model

Next,

we test the

prototype-based model based on the best perform-

ing baseline configuration of ±2 labels, summa-

rized in Table 4, reporting results on 20 and 45

labels to compare performance with and without

considerations to legal significance. We perform a

simple model ablation: first, we train from the base

model with only the DPreced loss term. Next, we

add the DProvis term that incorporates provision

source text.

Over these experiments, the prototype-based

loss results in comparable performance to vanilla

fine-tuning while only tuning on the DPreced term.

However, the 20-label task (75% procedural ci-

tations) sees dramatic improvements from the

DProvis term, outperforming vanilla fine-tuning

by 4 points in Macro-F1. Conversely, the DProvis

term with the same hyperparameters seems to hin-

der the performance of the 45-label task, decreasing

by 4 points in Macro-F1.

Perturbations

To further validate the feature im-

portance of the provisions, we perform several per-

turbations from our Preced + Provis model. We

attempt two settings: 1) Keyword Masking, i.e.

replacing the input keywords with the [MASK]

token, and 2) Random Masking, where we ran-

domly mask 15% of the input tokens. For keyword

masking, we use a statistical keyword extractor,

YAKE (Campos et al., 2020), to extract 20 ngrams,

up to n = 2, from the provision text.



Experiment Setting

20 labels

45 labels

Macro-f1

Micro-f1

Macro-f1

Micro-f1

Preced

69.0 (+0.1)

72.9 (+1.8)

69.3 (-0.2)

74.4 (-0.5)

Preced + Provis

73.2 (+4.3)

73.4 (+2.3)

65.9 (-3.6)

71.4 (-3.5)

Keyword Masking

42.5 (-30.7)

52.4 (-21.0)

57.7 (-8.2)

63.6 (-7.8)

Random Masking

73.7 (+0.5)

74.8 (+1.4)

68.7 (+2.8)

72.2 (+0.8)

Freezing Encoder

66.9 (-6.3)

69.2 (-4.2)

64.0 (-1.9)

72.4 (-1.0)

Table 4: Model ablations and perturbations with our prototype-based architecture. Preced refers to training with

only DP reced loss from Eqn. 3, and Preced + Provis refers to training with both DP reced and DP rovis loss

terms. The numbers in brackets for the two model ablations indicate the deviation from vanilla fine-tuning. All

perturbations are performed training with Preced + Provis., and the numbers in brackets indicate deviation from

the Preced + Provis prototype results

.

…This appeal raises an issue

that we have not previously

decided: what standard

should be applied when

analyzing a claim that a

defendant has breached a

plea agreement…

- Precedents

- Provisions

- Citation 1

- Citation 10

- Citation 20

- Precedents

- Provisions

- Citation 1

- Citation 10

- Citation 20

(b) Projection after fine-tuning with DP reced + DP rovis.

(a) Projection after vanilla fine-tuning.

Figure 4: Latent space projections after our prototype-based fine-tuning, colour-coded by citation label. Red dots

are precedent-sourced prototypes, magenta dots are provision-based prototypes, and every other colour represents

samples from a different target citation.

All results are summarized in Table 4. Keyword

Masking reduces the model performance signifi-

cantly compared to random masking for both the

20-label and 45-label setting, but the effects are

stronger with 20 labels. This implies that cita-

tions with less relevance to the legal argument have

more similarity to their source provision, and our

distance-based classification sees increased perfor-

mance. It also explains why legal experts found

little value in predicting these citations; if it is easy

to predict a citation from keywords, the task would

be trivial to a lawyer. Conversely, citations with

more significance to a legal argument seem to have

more abstract relationships to the surrounding con-

text and to other citing documents, and constraining

them to the provision text has an adverse effect on

the performance. This also explains why random

masking offers better performance, as this step re-

duces spurious noise (Wang et al., 2022).

Vanilla Fine-tuning vs. Prototypes

Addition-

ally, we compare vanilla fine-tuning to prototype-

based training by freezing the latent space, as de-

noted by the Freezing Encoder experiment in

Table 4. We perform prototype discovery, encode

the provision text, then train our classification head

c without updating the prototype embeddings or

language model parameters. It is interesting to note

the performance decrease ranges from 1.0 to 6.3.

In other words, holding everything else constant,

re-organizing the latent space with our prototype-

based loss results in a 1.0-6.3 point increase in F1

score.

We visually inspect the learned information by

projecting the latent space of the 20-label models.

We reduce the dimensionality of the embeddings

with UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) to produce 2D

projections shown in Figure 4. Comparing the base-

line to our prototype-based loss, the latter is visu-

ally more well-organized; there are fewer outliers



Limitations

at the edges of the latent space and clear clusters of

cases corresponding to different citations.

We observe two main legal limitations for this

project.

First, it has limited practical use for

non-lawyers seeking legal help, also called self-

represented litigants. In fact, any system providing

legal citations, both precedent or statutory provi-

sion, to an untrained lawyer will be of very little

use, and even harmful. It is hard to imagine in

what context this might be used by non-lawyers

considering that they might not be able to translate

facts into a legal problem. That being said, many

direct-to-public legal applications have emerged

recently, and many of these applications do provide

insightful legal information along with the legal

sources (Morrison, 2019; Dahan and Liang, 2020).

While these applications have raised concerns as

to their legality, notably with the issue of unautho-

rized practice of law, many regulators including in

Canada, the United States and Europe have cau-

tiously supported the development of AI-power

technology for the general public.

Second,

several lawyers (especially appel-

late) have surprisingly expressed concerns regard-

ing “the Googlization of legal databases" (Vaid-

hyanathan, 2011). While they recognize the advan-

tages of intuitive AI non-Boolean research, they

claim that these algorithms are not superior when

it comes to locating a more obscure appellate case

law, to help win a case. It has even been argued

that Boolean logic remains faster and more efficient

because it does not lead to missed case. According

to this view, while the “Googlized" legal database

may quickly locate important caselaw especially

if decided by a higher court, it can miss less ob-

vious cases (Mart et al., 2019). In our work, this

challenge translates to the long-tail problem for le-

gal citations, and our use of embedding distance

encourages matching based on semantic similarity.

In other words, we only look for the most obvious

citations, which correlates to higher performance

on easier (procedural) citations and lower perfor-

mance on harder (non-procedural) citations. Our

work does not sufficiently address this problem, so

we encourage more proficient information retrieval

or prototype discovery methods in the future.

From a deep learning perspective, the main lim-

itation is due to the use of k-means clustering in

our implementation of the system. There were

several points of instability noted during the train-

ing process, which we theorize is largely due to

the initializations of the k-means clustering algo-

After further investigation into the architecture,

we observed there was only one prototype discov-

ered for each target citation after vanilla fine-tuning.

The remaining cluster centroids did not meet the

cosine similarity threshold. This likely increases re-

dundancies in the activations, which makes it easier

to find patterns in embedding distances. However,

the prototypes are arbitrarily located in the latent

space, so the model might be learning spurious

prototype activation patterns.

6


## Conclusion


We study Legal Citation Prediction (LCP), a prob-

lem that serves as a foundational function for deci-

sion making in modern legal systems with societal

impact. In our work, we built an inherently inter-

pretable prototype architecture that is compatible

with any language model encoder, and explains its

decisions based on similarity to precedents and pro-

vision text of the target citation. We automatically

discover prototypes from the training set for each

target citation, which reduces the need for expert

input, and make predictions based on an input’s

similarity to these prototypes. Through empirical

study, we show strong evidence of our architecture

towards LCP, offering more interpretability than

vanilla fine-tuning for equivalent performance.

We also demonstrate that leveraging a combina-

tion of precedents and the target provisions’ texts

in the during model training results in comparable

or greater performance to the baseline language

model, although the effectiveness of our full ar-

chitecture depends on the legal nature of the tar-

get citations. Compared to vanilla fine-tuning, our

model’s latent space visibly separates different cita-

tion embeddings into distinct groups. It is possible

to apply our distance-based classification head to

an encoder trained with vanilla fine-tuning, but the

classification is likely based on spurious features.

In practice, this system could be extended to any ci-

tation target that has prior examples and source text,

such as prior cases (i.e. caselaw). Interpretability

is a crucial requirement for deploying transparent

AI systems, and we encourage more work in this

direction for applications with significant social

impact.



rithm. When the prototypes are initialized, the

corresponding terms in the loss function have a

strong influence on the cross-entropy loss, which

leads to model collapse. Even when the prototypes

are initialized properly, the loss function overfits

to the prototypes after several updates but does not

provide improvement in the classification perfor-

mance, which is why we choose the best model by

validation macro F1 instead of validation loss.

University. We also acknowledge feedback from

David Liang and Solinne Jung from the Conflict

Analytics Lab, as well as the ACL review commit-

tee, that helped us improve the work.


## References


Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez,

Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham Tabik, Al-

berto Barbado, Salvador García, Sergio Gil-López,

Daniel Molina, Richard Benjamins, et al. 2020. Ex-

plainable artificial intelligence (xai): Concepts, tax-

onomies, opportunities and challenges toward respon-

sible ai. Information Fusion, 58:82–115.

Ethics Statement

Intended Use

We see at least two applications for

legal practice. First, this system could serve as pre-

dictive text drafting application for legal memo and

judicial opinions. This application would recom-

mend a list of citations - both precedents, statutes

and even secondary literature - that is the most rel-

evant to the legal problems and concept discussed

in the memo or opinion. Second, such application

may also be integrated into legal databases, such

as Westlaw or LexisNexis. While these databases

have been working on new algorithms based on

non-Boolean keyword searches with more intuitive

AI features, more work is needed when it comes to

finding the most relevant citation.

Paul Axel-Lute. 1982. Legal citation form: Theory and

practice. Law Libr. J., 75:148.

Vaishak Belle and Ioannis Papantonis. 2021. Princi-

ples and practice of explainable machine learning.

Frontiers in Big Data, 4.

Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan.


## 2020. Longformer: The long-document transformer.


arXiv:2004.05150.

Rohan Bhambhoria, Hui Liu, Samuel Dahan, and Xi-

aodan Zhu. 2022. Interpretable low-resource legal

decision making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01164.

Failure Mode

Although the task of citation pre-

diction is high-stakes and key in a lawyer’s deci-

sion making process, risks associated with system

failure are mitigated due to the system’s enhanced

interpretability. Since this system is intended for

lawyers, and also classifies based on similarity to

previous works, a user would be able to leverage

their expertise to validate the decision. If the cho-

sen provision text does not match the legal argu-

ment the user had in mind, they can easily examine

the similarity to other available citations, or discard

the system’s decision entirely.

Ricardo Campos, Vítor Mangaravite, Arian Pasquali,

Alípio Jorge, Célia Nunes, and Adam Jatowt. 2020.

Yake! keyword extraction from single documents

using multiple local features. Information Sciences,

509:257–289.

Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malaka-

siotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and Ion Androutsopoulos.


## 2020. LEGAL-BERT: The muppets straight out of


law school. In Findings of the Association for Com-

putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 2898–

2904, Online. Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.

Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett,

Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K Su. 2019. This looks

like that: deep learning for interpretable image recog-

nition. Advances in neural information processing

systems, 32.

Misuse Potential

As mentioned in the paper,

there is a high potential for people to confuse le-

gal citations with legal judgment, and people can

leverage the discovered citations to directly decide

a ruling. This system could be misused in that way

similar to previous models used in the industry,

such as COMPAS (Kirkpatrick, 2017).

Ian Covert, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. 2020. Fea-

ture removal is a unifying principle for model expla-

nation methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03623.

Faraz Dadgostari, Mauricio Guim, Peter A Beling,

Michael A Livermore, and Daniel N Rockmore. 2021.

Modeling law search as prediction. Artificial Intelli-

gence and Law, 29(1):3–34.

Acknowledgements

The research is in part supported by the NSERC

Discovery Grants, New Frontiers in Research Fund,

and the Research Opportunity Seed Fund (ROSF)

of Ingenuity Labs Research Institute at Queen’s

Samuel Dahan and David Liang. 2020. The case for

ai-powered legal aid. Queen’s LJ, 46:415.



Łukasz Górski and Shashishekar Ramakrishna. 2021.

Susan Nevelow Mart, Breda Joe, Ed Walters, Tito Sierra,

and Khalid Al-Kofahi. 2019. Inside the black box of

search algorithms. AALL Spectrum.

Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Lawyer’s Perspec-

tive, page 60–68. Association for Computing Machin-

ery, New York, NY, USA.

Peter W. Martin. 2020. § 1-000. basic legal citation:

What and why?

Jie Hou, Hanxiao Pan, Teng Guo, Ivan Lee, Xiangjie

Kong, and Feng Xia. 2019. Prediction methods and

applications in the science of science: A survey.

Computer Science Review, 34:100197.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. 2018.

Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and pro-

jection for dimension reduction.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1802.03426.

Zihan Huang, Charles Low, Mengqiu Teng, Hongyi

Zhang, Daniel E Ho, Mark S Krass, and Matthias

Grabmair. 2021. Context-aware legal citation recom-

mendation using deep learning. In Proceedings of

the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial

Intelligence and Law, pages 79–88.

Will Morrison. 2019. Technology task force: Update

report.

Shounak Paul, Pawan Goyal, and Saptarshi Ghosh. 2022.

LeSICiN: A Heterogeneous Graph-based Approach

for Automatic Legal Statute Identification from In-

dian Legal Documents. In Proceedings of the 36th

AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).

Weina Jin, Xiaoxiao Li, and Ghassan Hamarneh. 2022.

Evaluating explainable ai on a multi-modal medical

imaging task: Can existing algorithms fulfill clinical

requirements? In Association for the Advancement

of Artificial Intelligence Conference (AAAI), volume

000, pages 000–000.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos

Guestrin. 2016. “why should i trust you?" explaining

the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of

the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on

knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1135–

1144.

Dong Ha Kim, Bo Kyeong Lee, and So Young Sohn.


## 2016. Quantifying technology–industry spillover ef-


fects based on patent citation network analysis of

unmanned aerial vehicle (uav). Technological Fore-

casting and Social Change, 105:140–157.

Cynthia Rudin. 2019. Stop explaining black box ma-

chine learning models for high stakes decisions and

use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine

Intelligence, 1(5):206–215.

Keith Kirkpatrick. 2017. It’s not the algorithm, it’s the


## data. Communications of the ACM, 60:21 – 23.


Ali Sadeghian, Laksshman Sundaram, Daisy Zhe Wang,

William F Hamilton, Karl Branting, and Craig Pfeifer.


## 2018. Automatic semantic edge labeling over le-


gal citation graphs. Artificial Intelligence and Law,

26(2):127–144.

Loet Leydesdorff, Lutz Bornmann, and Caroline S Wag-

ner. 2019. The relative influences of government

funding and international collaboration on citation

impact. Journal of the Association for Information

Science and Technology, 70(2):198–201.

Jaromir Savelka and Kevin D Ashley. 2021. Discov-

ering explanatory sentences in legal case decisions

using pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2112.07165.

Hanwen Liu, Huaizhen Kou, Chao Yan, and Lianyong

Qi. 2019a. Link prediction in paper citation network

to construct paper correlation graph. EURASIP Jour-

nal on Wireless Communications and Networking,

2019(1):1–12.

Naoki Shibata, Yuya Kajikawa, and Ichiro Sakata. 2012.

Link prediction in citation networks. Journal of the

American society for information science and tech-

nology, 63(1):78–85.

Xiao Liu, Da Yin, Yansong Feng, Yuting Wu, and

Dongyan Zhao. 2021. Everything has a cause: Lever-

aging causal inference in legal text analysis. CoRR,

abs/2104.09420.

S. Vaidhyanathan. 2011. The Googlization of Every-

thing: (And Why We Should Worry). University of

California Press.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-

dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,

Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019b.

Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-

proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.

Pengfei Wang, Yu Fan, Shuzi Niu, Ze Yang, Yongfeng

Zhang, and Jiafeng Guo. 2019. Hierarchical match-

ing network for crime classification. In proceedings

of the 42nd international ACM SIGIR conference on

research and development in information retrieval,

pages 325–334.

Chu Fei Luo, Rohan Bhambhoria, Samuel Dahan, and

Xiaodan Zhu. 2022. Evaluating Explanation Cor-

rectness in Legal Decision Making. Proceedings of

the Canadian Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Https://caiac.pubpub.org/pub/67i6fcki.

Tianlu Wang, Rohit Sridhar, Diyi Yang, and Xuezhi

Wang. 2022. Identifying and mitigating spurious cor-

relations for improving robustness in NLP models.

In Findings of the Association for Computational

Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pages 1719–1729, Seattle,

United States. Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.

Yuhao Ma, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen.


## 2020. Learning deep face representation with long-


tail data: An aggregate-and-disperse approach. Pat-

tern Recognition Letters, 133:48–54.



Nuo Xu, Pinghui Wang, Long Chen, Li Pan, Xiaoyan

Wang, and Junzhou Zhao. 2020. Distinguish confus-

ing law articles for legal judgment prediction. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2004.02557.

U.S. Code

# citations

# documents

42 § 1983

64524

31246

11 § 523 (a)

22377

7676

28 § 1331

18419

13967

28 § 157 (b)

16517

12319

42 § 1981

13190

6178

Wenmian Yang, Weijia Jia, Xiaojie Zhou, and Yutao

Luo. 2019. Legal judgment prediction via multi-

perspective bi-feedback network.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1905.03969.

Table 5: Statistics on frequency of citations for the top

5 most frequently cited U.S. codes. U.S. Code citations

are formatted [Title] §[Section] [(optional) Subsection].

Each citation can appear in a document multiple times,

but even counting documents alone, there is a significant

imbalance between the different labels.

Xiao Yu, Quanquan Gu, Mianwei Zhou, and Jiawei Han.


## 2012. Citation prediction in heterogeneous biblio-


graphic networks. Proceedings of the 12th SIAM In-

ternational Conference on Data Mining, SDM 2012,

pages 1119–1130.

Zaixi Zhang, Qi Liu, Hao Wang, Chengqiang Lu,

and Cheekong Lee. 2021. Protgnn: Towards self-

explaining graph neural networks. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2112.00911.

Context

Min.

Max.

Mean

N/A

5

120593

1973.83

±4

3

39848

825.96

±2

3

21005

466.06

Haoxi Zhong, Yuzhong Wang, Cunchao Tu, Tianyang

Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2020a. Iter-

atively questioning and answering for interpretable

legal judgment prediction. Proceedings of the AAAI

Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(01):1250–

1257.

Table 6: RoBERTa token count statistics with varying

context spans.

Haoxi Zhong, Chaojun Xiao, Cunchao Tu, Tianyang

Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2020b. How

does nlp benefit legal system: A summary of legal

artificial intelligence. In Proceedings of ACL.


## result aligns with the findings of previous work


(Zhang et al., 2021). We tested other configura-

tions, such as euclidean distance instead of cosine,

but these settings gave the best performance. For

the DPreced weights, we use the same λ values as

described in (Zhang et al., 2021), where λ1 = 0.10,

λ2 = 0.0005, and λ3 = 0.001. Then, we chose

δ = 0.10 for DProvis, and a minimum cosine simi-

larity smin of -1.

A

Additional Implementation Details

A.1

Training Parameters

All experiments were run on 11GB Nvidia 2080

GPUs. We used an initial learning rate of 2e-5,

weight decay of 0.01, batch size of 8, and trained

the system for 20 epochs. The training pipeline and

models were implemented using Huggingface and

Pytorch python libraries, and all pre-trained lan-

guage model checkpoints were also downloaded

from Huggingface’s online repository. The total

runtime is approximately 30 hours for 20 epochs

using the BERT-base variants, but we observe con-

vergence in the loss by 10 epochs. Additionally, we

select the best model by validation macro-F1 score

with our prototype model instead of validation loss.

All experiments are reported as a single run.

Clustering for prototype discovery was imple-

mented with the PyKeops (Python Kernel Opera-

tions) library 3. We used k-means clustering on

the embedding space with k=5, clustered on co-

sine distance, and we re-cluster the prototypes ev-

ery 5 epochs. We tested k=3 and k=5 for cluster-

ing, and chose k=5 as the best performing. This

A.2

Preliminary language modelling results

We experimented with three models:

• RoBERTa-base (Liu et al., 2019b) (110M pa-

rameters) — An optimized version of BERT,

which is an encoder-only pre-trained language

model.

• LegalBERT (Chalkidis et al., 2020) (110M

parameters) — A variant of BERT domain

adapted to law by pre-training on court cases.

• Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) (149M pa-

rameters) — An optimized transformer archi-

tecture with sparse attention for a longer con-

text window (4096 tokens vs. 512 in BERT).

A.3

Preprocessing

During the training process, we use regex expres-

sions to remove all HTML web formatting, links,

3https://www.kernel-operations.io/



U.S. Code citations, and Supreme Court citations.

Non-ASCII characters are also removed, but ev-

erything else is preserved as they did not cause a

noticeable decrease in performance. Additionally,

when predicting fewer than 100 citations in later

experiments, we again remove any documents that

do not contain the target citations. For our train

set of 141237 documents, this step results in 50567

documents for experiments on the top 5 citations,

90243 for top 20 citations. We also retrieve sur-

rounding text spans in different configurations as

described in Section 4.3.

B

Additional dataset analysis

The long-tail nature of the dataset stays consistent

across the different target label settings we reported,

as shown in Figure 5.

C

Expert Feedback

We recruited three volunteer legal experts through

our institution for our brief feedback study. They

have approximately 20 years of combined expe-

rience and were able to converse freely to share

opinions. While we did not provide compensation

for this specific study, they are active collabora-

tors and receive salary or course credits for this

interview.



7000

25000

6000

20000

Citation Frequency

Citation Frequency

5000

15000

4000

3000

10000

2000

5000

1000

0

5

10

15

Citation

0

10

20

30

40

Citation

(a) Frequency of citations for the 20-label set-

ting.

(b) Frequency of citations for the 45-label set-

ting.

Figure 5: Additional plots of citation frequency, demonstrating that every tested citation set exhibits a long-tail

distribution.

Citation

42 U.S. Code § 1988

Provision

Proceedings in vindication of civil rights

(a)Applicability of statutory and common law...

(b)Attorney’s fees... the court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other

than the United States, a reasonable attorney’s fee as part of the costs, except that in

any action brought against a judicial officer for an act or omission taken in such officer’s

judicial capacity such officer shall not be held liable for any costs, including attorney’s

fees, unless such action was clearly in excess of such officer’s jurisdiction.

(c)Expert fees...

Precedent

<s>MEMORANDUM-DECISION AND ORDER KAHN, District Judge. Presently

pending is a motion by Plaintiff Association of International Automobile

Manufacturers, Inc. ("AIAM") for attorneys fees pursuant to Fed.R.Civ.P. 54(d) (A)

and <mask>. Plaintiff asserts that it is the prevailing party in an action brought under

and is thus presumptively entitled to such fees. Ass’n v. Cahill ("AAMA II"), <mask>,

reprinted at 1997 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1077, 1388. The remaining two prongs are also clearly

established. First, the right created by 209(a)’s prohibition is demonstrably not so

vague and amorphous that its enforcement will strain judicial competence...

Expert 1

2: It seems somewhat relevant but hard to say as I have no expertise in this area.

Also, I wonder whether the model is a Legal-Bert and saw the whole case.

Expert 2

3: The relevant part is the part about the attorney fees

Expert 3

1: The provision deals with compensating a party for attorney fees in order to enforce

an action. The sample, however, is dealing with a party/state’s right to enforce

emission standards.

Table 7: An example of a legal citation, the contents of the provision, a court opinion discovered by clustering the

latent space, and comments from the 3 legal experts. 2 of the 3 legal experts mention the few sentences regarding

attorney fees as relevant, but the third brought up the issue of these citations being ultimately separate to the case’s

contents.