Universal productivity patterns in research careers

Andre S. Sunahara,1 Matjaˇz Perc,2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and Haroldo V. Ribeiro1, ∗

1Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Estadual de Maring´a – Maring´a, PR 87020-900, Brazil

2Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Maribor, Koroˇska cesta 160, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia

3Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan

4Alma Mater Europaea, Slovenska ulica 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia

5Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefst¨adterstraße 39, 1080 Vienna, Austria

6Department of Physics, Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

(Dated: November 8, 2023)

A common expectation is that career productivity peaks rather early and then gradually declines

with seniority. But whether this holds true is still an open question. Here we investigate the pro-

ductivity trajectories of almost 8,500 scientists from over fifty disciplines using methods from time

series analysis, dimensionality reduction, and network science, showing that there exist six univer-

sal productivity patterns in research. Based on clusters of productivity trajectories and network

representations where researchers with similar productivity patterns are connected, we identify con-

stant, u-shaped, decreasing, periodic-like, increasing, and canonical productivity patterns, with the

latter two describing almost three-fourths of researchers. In fact, we find that canonical curves are

the most prevalent, but contrary to expectations, productivity peaks occur much more frequently

around mid-career rather than early. These results outline the boundaries of possible career paths

in science and caution against the adoption of stereotypes in tenure and funding decisions.

arXiv:2311.03834v1  [physics.soc-ph]  7 Nov 2023

have been restricted to a reduced set of career years in

specific fields of knowledge [20, 21] and have often relied

on linear regression models [14, 17, 20, 21, 23], which may

not fully capture the complexity of productivity patterns.

Some authors have also proposed generative models of

productivity curves [14, 15, 24], but have been unable to

validate these patterns with empirical evidence.

Large-scale studies that investigate individual shapes

of productivity trajectories are scarce, with the work of

Way et al. [25] being one of the few exceptions. Using


## data from over two thousand computer science faculty


members in the U.S. and Canada, they applied a seg-

mented linear model composed of two continuous lines

to each researcher’s career to evaluate the universality of

the canonical productivity narrative. Research has found

that almost half of the careers in this dataset is consistent

with strictly constant, increasing, or decreasing produc-

tivity trajectories. Conversely, only 20% of the trajecto-

ries have been found to exhibit early growth followed by

a slow decline in productivity, thus suggesting that the

canonical narrative may not be as prevalent as previously

thought. However, the use of piecewise regressions lim-

its the emergence of possible nonlinear patterns such as

periodic trajectories, and the focus on computer science

may limit the generalization of these conclusions to other

academic disciplines. Additionally, research so far has ig-

nored that structural changes in the scientific enterprise

– such as the increase in scientific collaboration [26] and

pressure to produce in large quantities [27–29] – may im-

pact the research culture of different cohorts and their

productivity trajectories.

Here we investigate the productivity trajectories of

over eight thousand scientists from the elite of the Brazil-

ian research community, spanning more than fifty re-

search disciplines. We employ a coherent data-driven ap-

proach that combines methods from time series analysis,


## INTRODUCTION


Scientific productivity is routinely used to measure and

assess the performance of researchers, as it quantifies

their contributions to the scientific community through

scholarly publications [1].

When combined with other

indicators of research quality, productivity plays an im-

portant role in determining job placement [2], promotions

to tenured positions [3], funding allocation [4, 5], and in

mapping the development of science [6, 7]. Given its im-

portance, understanding productivity patterns over the

course of scientific careers has been a long-standing prior-

ity for researchers from various disciplines, and Lehman’s

monograph is considered a seminal work in this regard [8].

In 1953, he observed that the aggregated contributions

of scientists, musical composers, artists, and writers ex-

hibit a pattern of rapid early-career growth followed by

a gradual decline in productivity as their careers pro-

gressed. This pattern has been consistently observed in

various contexts and datasets, and it is often referred to

as the “canonical productivity narrative” [8–19].

But the notion that there is a universal pattern of pro-

ductivity across scientific disciplines and demographic

groups has been significantly challenged by recent re-

search. Indeed, studies have found evidence for a vari-

ety of productivity patterns, including constant [12, 17],

decreasing [13, 20, 21], increasing [17], and periodic-

like [11, 22, 23]. However, many studies have used aggre-

gated data, which may introduce bias due to the “compo-

sitional fallacy” [15] – a common issue that arises when

trying to infer typical productivity trajectories based on

average behavior across many individuals. Other studies

∗hvr@dfi.uem.br



2

often used in science of science studies, our dataset has

the main advantage of not suffering from author name

disambiguation issues as well as it offers a systematic

coverage of scientists across the country. We construct

raw time series of yearly productivity (number of publi-

cations per year) for all researchers, assuming that each

career starts after doctorate completion. The researchers

in our study have career lengths of at least ten years (the

same threshold used by Way et al. [25]), and the median

career length is 17 years (Fig. S1 [32]).

We do not directly use raw productivity series in our


## analysis.


Instead, we take into account three charac-

teristics that may hinder the identification of the most

common productivity curves: inflation, different scales,

and the noisy nature of productivity series.

Scien-

tific productivity has been rising worldwide over the

years [18, 30, 31], and the researchers in our study

show an overall increase in productivity of approximately

0.8 papers per year per decade.

This inflation is also

discipline-specific (Figs. S2 and S3 [32]). To account for

inflation effects, we first deflate the productivity series us-

ing the yearly average values of each discipline [33], such

that the deflated productivity represents the re-scaled

number of papers per year as if they were published in


## 2015. Second, to make productivity trajectories compa-


rable among researchers, we calculate standard score val-

ues (z-scores) of productivity relative to each researcher

from the deflated productivity series. The z-scores quan-

tify how many standard deviation units researchers per-

form above or below their own average productivity and

make all time series comparable in scale. Productivity

series also have an intrinsic noisy nature that reflects the

complex processes involved in producing and publishing

scientific papers.

The publication year often does not

mark the actual completion time of an article, as most

papers are not promptly accepted for publication. Thus,

lastly, we apply a Gaussian filter to the z-scores produc-

tivity series to account for these random fluctuations.

After obtaining deflated, standardized, and smoothed

productivity curves, we apply the dynamic time warp-

ing (DTW) algorithm [34] to estimate the similarities

among all pairs of researchers’ trajectories. The DTW

is a shape-based dissimilarity measure that allows the

comparison of time series with different lengths and non-

optimal alignment – crucial features for comparing re-

searchers with different career lengths and patterns that

can be shifted in time. Next, we use the DTW dissimilar-

ity matrix along with the uniform manifold approxima-

tion and projection (UMAP) method [35] to create a net-

work representation of the similarities among researchers’

trajectories. UMAP is a state-of-the-art dimensionality

reduction technique based on the mathematical grounds

of Riemannian geometry and algebraic topology capa-

ble of balancing the emphasis between local and global

structures [35].

In short, it creates a graph represen-

tation from a dissimilarity matrix of high-dimensional


## datapoints and projects them into a lower-dimensional


space using a force-directed layout algorithm. We focus

dimensionality reduction, and network science to cluster

productivity trajectories based on their pairwise similari-

ties. Unlike most previous works, our approach considers

trajectories individually, accounts for discipline-specific

inflation of productivity [18, 30, 31], the noisy nature of

individual productivity trajectories, and possible cohort

effects. Importantly, we do not explicitly assume one or a

set of predetermined shapes for the productivity curves,

which allows us to discern the natural emergence of uni-

versal patterns of productivity in scientific careers. Our

research identifies productivity patterns that have been

only qualitatively hypothesized [23] or found in studies

based on aggregated data [12, 13, 17, 20, 21, 23].

In

particular, we identify six categories of productivity tra-

jectories: constant, u-shaped, decreasing, periodic, in-

creasing, and canonical, with the latter two categories

describing almost three-fourths of researchers. Increas-

ing trajectories are much more frequent among early-

career researchers than among senior researchers (45% vs.

19%), while canonical curves are much more prevalent

among senior researchers than among younger scholars

(65% vs. 27%). However, the initial career years of se-

nior researchers are categorized as increasing trajectories

with slightly less prevalence than those found for younger

researchers. Only a small fraction of senior researchers

with initially increasing productivity trends is able to

maintain this pattern, while the majority of the remain-

der progresses to canonical trajectories. This result high-

lights the importance of considering cohort and size ef-

fects when investigating productivity trajectories, and it

indicates that young researchers characterized by increas-

ing trajectories may also progress to canonical patterns

in the future.

In what follows, we present these results in detail, and

then discuss the influence of funding allocation, tenure

positions, and job security in research on the emergence

of productivity patterns. We also caution against widely

held but fixed and oversimplified assumptions associated

with scientific careers, in the hope that the reported uni-

versal patterns will open the door for more inclusive and

improved evaluation of research productivity.


## RESULTS


Our results are based on the academic curricula of

8,493 Brazilian researchers from 56 disciplines who hold

the CNPq Research Productivity Fellowship (see Meth-

ods for details). This traditional fellowship aims to sup-

port the scientific enterprise and has been awarded to

scholars producing high-quality research since the 1970s.

Scholars holding this fellowship are commonly considered

among the elite of Brazilian scientists. All curricula vi-

tae were collected from the Lattes platform (Plataforma

Lattes, a widely used governmental curriculum platform

in Brazil) where CNPq fellows are required to keep their

complete and up-to-date records for maintaining or ap-

plying for the fellowship. Compared to other databases



3

2

3

1

533 (6.3%)

542 (6.4%)

663 (7.8%)

10

10

4

9

8

469 (5.5%)

727 (8.6%)

7

4

5

6

5

9

1

3

966 (11.4%)

1,107 (13.0%)

2

8

6

7

1,136 (13.4%)

375 (4.3%)

1,975 (23.3%)

FIG. 1. Clustering patterns of researchers’ productivity curves. The central panel displays a network representation, where

each node represents a researcher and weighted edges connect those with similar productivity trajectories. Ten distinct com-

munities, represented by different colors and labeled 1 to 10, are identified and correspond to groups of researchers with similar

productivity patterns. The surrounding panels display the productivity curves of researchers in each community, with the

black curves representing the average behavior of each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to

the unit interval and the numbers and fractions of researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The ten clusters

are further grouped into six categories: constant (cluster 1), u-shaped (cluster 2), decreasing (cluster 3), periodic-like (cluster

4), increasing (clusters 5 and 6), and canonical-like (clusters 7 to 10) curves. Increasing and canonical-like patterns describe

almost three-fourths of the researchers in our study, while periodic-like curves are the least common. Clusters and nodes that

are close together share similar productivity patterns (see this page for an interactive visualization).

only on the first step of the UMAP algorithm, mapping

our dissimilarity matrix into a network where researchers

are represented as nodes and weighted edges connect re-

searchers with similar productivity trajectories. Finally,

we apply the Infomap algorithm to identify the commu-

nity structure of the network created by UMAP, which

corresponds to groups of researchers with similar produc-

tivity trajectories. A similar approach has been recently

and successfully used by Lee et al. [36] to cluster extra-

cellular spike waveforms in a Neuroscience context. All

steps used to cluster productivity trajectories are fur-

ther detailed in the Methods section and illustrated in

Fig. S4 [32].

ated in its first step is always the same for a fixed dataset.

However, the Infomap algorithm is based on probabil-

ity flows of random walks on the network and produces

similar but different network partitions. To account for

this non-deterministic nature, we run one thousand re-

alizations of the Infomap algorithm and observe that all

partitions are qualitatively comparable. The number of

detected communities ranges from 7 to 14, but almost

85% of all realizations yield from 9 to 11 communities,

with 10 being the most common number of partitions

(34%, Fig. S5 [32]). We select the best partition as the

one with the largest silhouette score [37] among all real-

izations with 10 communities (see Methods for details).

We use Infomap because it is one of the best-performing


## methods for detecting planted partitions in benchmark


graphs [38–40], particularly for undirected and weighted

While the final low-dimensional embeddings produced

by UMAP are not deterministic (meaning that UMAP

yields similar but different embeddings), the network cre-



4

sent slightly more than a quarter of researchers, with

periodic-like patterns being the least common. As a re-

sult, increasing and canonical-like patterns describe al-

most three-fourths of the researchers in our study. Specif-

ically, 35% of researchers display increasing curves, which

are divided into two clusters: one where productivity al-

ways increases over careers (cluster 6) and the other ex-

hibiting growing trends with declining rates or approach-

ing a plateau (cluster 5). Canonical-like curves, broadly

defined here as careers containing a single peak in pro-

ductivity (clusters 7 to 10), are the most frequent type of

trajectory, comprising 39% of researchers in our dataset.

We use the term canonical-like because Lehman’s def-

inition is more restrictive, assuming the canonical nar-

rative as “curves of creativity that rise rapidly in early

maturity and then decline slowly after attaining an ear-

lier maximum” [8]. Although this definition is qualita-

tive, one may interpret that solely cluster 7 strictly meets

Lehman’s definition, as it is the only cluster that shows

a maximum before mid-career (Fig. S11 [32]). The peak

positions are indeed one of the most distinct behaviors

among clusters 7 to 10, and the reason they emerge as

separated clusters (Table S1 [32]).

To validate the robustness of the six categories of pro-

ductivity trajectories, we perform ten realizations of our

clustering procedure using subsamples obtained by ran-

domly dividing our dataset into three equal-sized parts.

For every part and realization, we verify that the clusters

can be categorized into the same six patterns observed

in the complete data. We classify each researcher into

one of the six categories in each realization, allowing us

to verify the consistency with the classification obtained

from the entire dataset. On average, 73% of researchers

are assigned to the same category as determined from

the full data. The confusion matrix primarily exhibits a

diagonal pattern, with inconsistencies occurring mainly

when periodic curves are labeled as increasing or canon-

ical trajectories (Fig. S12A [32]). We also calculate the

normalized entropy related to the assignment probabil-

ities of each pattern for every researcher across the ten

realizations. This analysis reveals that 80% of researchers

display normalized entropy below 0.5, indicating low vari-

ability in their assigned category (Fig. S12B [32]). More-

over, approximately one-third of researchers exhibit zero

entropy, signifying that they are consistently assigned to

a single category. We further observe that researchers

displaying higher entropy are located in the frontier be-

tween two or more clusters (where patterns tend to be

more complex) as well as in the region of overlap between

the periodic (cluster 4) and increasing with declining

rates (cluster 5) trajectories in the network representa-

tion (Fig. S12C [32]). These same observations hold true

when dividing the dataset into two halves (Fig. S13 [32]).

Additionally, we conduct a human validation where

a panel of two experts categorizes 25% of trajectories

randomly sampled from our dataset in a stratified man-

ner.

They are introduced to an interactive applica-

tion where z-scores and smoothed trajectories are in-

networks as in our case.

However, deterministic com-

munity detection methods such as the Louvain [41] and

the Leiden [42] also generate similar clustering patterns

(Figs. S6 and S7 [32]), but with lower silhouette scores

(Fig. S8 [32]).

The central panel of Figure 1 displays the network rep-

resentation produced by UMAP, with different colors in-

dicating the ten communities detected by Infomap’s best

partition. Surrounding the network visualization, we plot

the productivity trajectories of all researchers in each

group, as well as the average behavior of each cluster (la-

beled 1 to 10). We also re-scale the lengths of researchers’

careers in each group to the unit interval to better visual-

ize trajectories with different lengths. Productivity tra-

jectories in each group display very similar shapes and the

silhouette score of the clustering is significantly higher

than values obtained by shuffling trajectories among clus-

ters (Fig. S8 [32]). Our best partition not only generates

internally consistent groups, but it also yields a signifi-

cantly higher silhouette score compared to null models in

which artificial careers are generated from a binomial dis-

tribution and the shuffling of productivity trajectories of

each researcher (Fig. S8 [32]). This network representa-

tion preserves both local and global structures of the dis-

similarity matrix (Fig. S9 [32]), meaning that nodes and

clusters that are close together share similar productivity

patterns. For example, clusters 7-10 all have an average

behavior marked by a peak in productivity and appear

adjacent to each other in the network. In contrast, clus-

ters 3 and 6 represent opposite behaviors (increasing vs.

decreasing trends) and are therefore located far apart.

When visually inspecting productivity patterns over the

network representation (see this page for an interactive

visualization), we also observe that nodes located close

to the frontiers between two or more communities of-

ten display more complex productivity patterns that may

resemble a mixture of the average behavior of adjacent

clusters.

Our analysis uncovers a diverse set of productivity tra-

jectories that go beyond the canonical narrative and in-

clude patterns that were only conjectured or observed in

studies using aggregated data [12, 13, 17, 20, 21, 23]. A

detailed examination of the trajectories and their deriva-

tives (Fig. S10 [32]) allows us to group the ten clusters

into six categories: constant (cluster 1), u-shaped (clus-

ter 2), decreasing (cluster 3), periodic-like (cluster 4),

increasing (clusters 5 and 6), and canonical-like (clus-

ters 7 to 10) curves. Constant trajectories, which make

up 6.4% of researchers, are characterized by stable or

slightly decreasing productivity. U-shaped trajectories,

accounting for 6.3% of researchers, show a decline be-

fore an increase in productivity. Decreasing trajectories,

representing 7.8% of researchers, exhibit a sharp decline

in the first half of careers followed by an almost con-

stant plateau in productivity. Periodic-like trajectories,

which constitute 5.5% of researchers, have a peak be-

fore mid-career followed by a decline before another in-

crease in productivity. Together, these patterns repre-



5

more frequent than the increasing with declining rate

pattern (cluster 5) in all length categories, but especially

among the most experienced researchers. Almost all re-

searchers exhibiting increasing trajectories with careers

longer than 24 years belong to cluster 6.

Among the

canonical-like curves, the middle and later-career peak

patterns of clusters 8 and 9 are the most common be-

haviors across all length categories, except among the

most experienced researchers, for which cluster 10 is the

most common. The early-stage peak behavior of cluster

8 is the rarest pattern across all categories, except for

the youngest researchers, and it is the only canonical-

like curve whose prevalence does not increase with ca-

reer length.

We also obtain similar occupation trends

when considering disciplines separately, with only Bio-

chemistry exhibiting an almost constant fraction of in-

creasing productivity curves across the categories of ca-

reer length. There are however appreciable differences

in the prevalence of specific patterns among disciplines

(as detailed in Figs. S16 and S17 [32]).

For example,

canonical-like curves are 8.9 times more frequent than

increasing curves among the most experienced mathe-

maticians and only 1.4 times more prevalent among se-

nior biochemists. Conversely, increasing curves are twice

as common as canonical-like ones among the youngest

mathematicians and chemists and only 1.3 times more

prevalent among physicists.

Career length is directly linked to the year of doctorate

completion of each researcher (Fig. S18 [32]) and serves

as a proxy for grouping different generations of scientists.

Indeed, the overwhelming majority of researchers with

10-14 career years concluded their doctorates after the

2000s, while those with more than 24 career years did it

before the 1990s. These groups of young and senior scien-

tists represent unique cohorts that are subject to specific

socioeconomic conditions, cultural environments, knowl-

edge base of the field, and baseline level of research abil-

ity [14, 23]. Therefore, the different prevalence of produc-

tivity curves may partially reflect the distinct research

and publication cultures of these groups. In particular,

the much higher fraction of increasing trajectories among

the youngest cohort seems to align with the increasing

pressure on scholars to produce in large quantities [27–29]

and with the fact this pressure is considered exception-

ally high on young scientists [43]. At the same time, the

careers of young researchers cannot be regarded as com-

plete careers as even patterns emerging after 10-14 career

years may change over time. For instance, part of the

increasing patterns exhibited by young researchers may

eventually represent only the beginning of canonical-like

productivity curves. The precise identification of gener-

ational effects in the prevalence of productivity patterns

thus requires a dataset comprising entire careers of differ-

ent scientist cohorts, which is not the case in our study.

However, we can partially test this hypothesis by an-

alyzing the initial career years of senior scientists and

comparing the prevalence of productivity patterns with

the youngest cohort. To do this, we apply our clustering

dividually shown. Buttons are provided for each cate-

gory, and an additional button is available when they

disagree on the classification, for performing the task.

We compare these human-based labels with those deter-

mined from our clustering procedure, finding an overall

agreement of 73% and a confusion matrix mostly diag-

onal (Fig. S14A [32]).

Inconsistencies occur primarily

when experts classify decreasing trajectories as u-shaped

curves and periodic trajectories as canonical curves. Pe-

riodic and u-shaped curves are also the categories with

the highest levels of disagreement between the experts.

Among increasing and canonical categories, the increas-

ing with declining rates (cluster 5) and late peak (cluster


## 9) productivity curves are most frequently confused with


each other (Fig. S14B [32]). Similar to the subsampling

validation analysis, disagreements between the experts’

classification and our clustering process occur for careers

located in the frontier between two or more clusters and

in the overlapping region between periodic (cluster 4)

and increasing with declining rates (cluster 5) patterns

(Fig. S14C [32]).

The prevalence of each productivity pattern may vary

among academic careers with different lengths. To exam-

ine this potential size effect, we estimate the career size

distributions of researchers in each cluster.

Figure 2A

shows that all clusters encompass a broad range of ca-

reer lengths, but with distinct median career sizes (Ta-

ble S1 [32]). Constant and increasing curves exhibit the

smallest median career sizes (median of ∼15 years), while

canonical and periodic-like trajectories represent more se-

nior researchers (median of ∼20 years). To identify the

most common productivity pattern at each career stage,

we group academic careers into four length categories

(10-14, 15-19, 20-24, and larger than 24 years) and cal-

culate the prevalence of each pattern. Figure 2B shows

that increasing trajectories are the dominant pattern for

short careers, accounting for 45% of researchers in the

shortest career category. However, increasing curves be-

come less prevalent among researchers with longer ca-

reers, representing only 19% of researchers in the longest

career category. Canonical-like trajectories present the

opposite behavior and are much more prevalent among

researchers with longer careers.

Only 27% of the re-

searchers with 10-14 career years display canonical-like

productivity trajectories, whereas this pattern character-

izes 65% of researchers with more than 24 career years.

Even when combined, constant, u-shaped, decreasing,

and periodic-like careers occur less frequently than in-

creasing or canonical-like curves in all length categories.

Still, we observe that constant, u-shaped, and decreasing

trajectories are relatively more common among younger

researchers, while periodic-like curves appear more often

among researchers with careers longer than 14 years.

Overall, we find similar occupation trends when ana-

lyzing the individual behavior of clusters comprising in-

creasing and canonical-like curves (Fig. S15 [32]). How-

ever, some clusters are more prevalent across the length

categories. The always-increasing pattern (cluster 6) is



6

2,800

careers

3,051

careers

1,857

careers

785

careers

A

B

C

Constant

U-shaped

Decreasing

Constant

Decreasing

(0.17)

Constant

1

First 14 years of careers longer than 24 years

Periodic

U-shaped

2

Periodic

Decreasing

Periodic

3

Increasing

(0.19)

0.19

U-shaped

0.09

4

0.28

5

0.45

0.33

Increasing

(0.41)

6

7

0.65

Increasing

0.30

Canonical

(0.65)

8

0.27

0.38

0.48

9

Canonical

(0.27)

10

Canonical

0.21

Career length

10

20

30

40

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

FIG. 2. Career length and cohort effects on the prevalence of productivity patterns. (A) Probability distributions of career

lengths for each of the ten clusters of productivity trajectories, as determined by kernel density estimation.

All clusters

encompass a broad range of career lengths, but these distributions are more localized in distinct positions (Table S1 [32]). (B)

Prevalence of productivity patterns across four categories of career length: 10-14 years, 15-19 years, 20-24 years, and greater

than 24 years. The dominant pattern among researchers with shorter careers, which also correspond to younger scholars, is the

increasing productivity curve. This pattern becomes less prevalent among researchers with longer careers, which corresponds to

more experienced scholars. Canonical-like trajectories exhibit the opposite behavior and are significantly more prevalent among

senior researchers. Periodic-like curves are also more common among researchers with long careers, while constant, u-shaped

and decreasing trajectories occur more among young researchers. (C) Comparison of the prevalence of productivity patterns in

the initial career years of senior researchers with those exhibited in later career stages. The left bars show the fractions of each

productivity pattern obtained when considering the initial 14 career years of researchers with careers longer than 24 years, and

the right ones show the prevalence of patterns when considering the full range of their careers. The connections between the

left and right bars indicate the migration flow among the productivity patterns. Almost half of canonical senior careers are

classified as increasing curves in their beginnings; however, only 9% of senior researchers who exhibit early-career increasing

productivity sustain this pattern with career progression.

approach to the entire dataset, but only consider the ini-

tial 14 career years of researchers with careers longer than

24 years. The best Infomap partition is again formed by

ten clusters (Figs. S19 and S20 [32]) with average pat-

terns very similar to those reported in Figure 1. This

allows us to group them into the same six categories,

with only the constant and decreasing patterns (clus-

ters 1 and 2) merged into a single cluster (cluster 1 of

Fig. S19 [32]). Figure 2C shows the prevalence of pro-

ductivity patterns associated with the beginning of senior

careers and the patterns they evolve to when considering

the entire length of senior careers (Fig. S21 [32] details

the transitions among individual clusters). Corroborat-

ing our hypothesis, we observe that almost half of the

senior careers classified as canonical are classified as in-

creasing curves in their beginnings. Only 9% of senior re-

searchers exhibiting early-career increasing productivity

sustain this pattern with career progression. Conversely,

78% of senior researchers with canonical-like early careers

maintain this pattern in later career stages. Moreover,

about 21% of senior careers classified as canonical show

an initial part compatible with constant/decreasing, pe-

riodic, and u-shaped patterns.

These rarer transitions

are usually associated with careers localized in the bor-

der between two or more communities, representing thus

more complex productivity patterns (see Fig. S22 [32] for

examples).

The behavior of senior scientists may not predict the

future for young scholars, but our findings suggest that

the high prevalence of increasing productivity patterns

among young researchers reflects the incomplete nature

of their careers. If early-career researchers follow their se-

nior counterparts, much more researchers will likely have

productivity patterns represented by canonical curves in

the future. However, we cannot ignore the potential ef-

fects of generational differences when comparing the pro-

ductivity patterns of young researchers even with the ini-

tial career years of senior researchers.

Indeed, our re-

sults show that increasing patterns are 10% more com-

mon among young researchers, while periodic-like curves

are three times more frequent in the initial years of senior

careers (Figs. 2B and 2C). At the same time, these early

differences are relatively small, suggesting that the struc-

tural changes in the scientific enterprise [5, 29, 44] may

have only a minor impact on researchers’ productivity

trajectories.



7

this pattern as their careers progressed. The relatively

small differences in the prevalence of patterns observed

between young researchers and the initial career years of

senior researchers suggest that the behavior observed for

senior scientists does not necessarily dictate the career

trajectory of young scholars. However, if early-career re-

searchers follow the same trajectory as their senior coun-

terparts, the prevalence of canonical-like curves is likely

to be underestimated.

But even if possibly underestimated, canonical-like

curves – broadly defined here as careers with a single peak

in productivity – are the most prevalent productivity

pattern, accounting for almost two-fifths of researchers.

While this result somehow supports the canonical narra-

tive of scientific productivity, we have also observed that

less than 5% of researchers in our study strictly meet

Lehman’s “canonical productivity narrative” [8] and ex-

hibit productivity curves that “rise rapidly in early ma-

turity and then decline slowly after attaining an earlier

maximum” [8].

These researchers belong to cluster 7,

which is only one of four clusters that is classified as

canonical-like, have median career lengths of 17 years,

and present a peak in productivity approximately 6 years

after their doctorates. The other three clusters (8, 9, and


## 10) account for almost 90% of researchers with canonical-


like patterns, who have slightly larger median career

lengths but a peak in productivity around 12 years af-

ter their doctorates. Although the “earlier maximum” in

Lehman’s definition is subjective, our research shows that

the peak in productivity is more likely to occur around

mid-career rather than early-career.

Additionally, the

rise and decline in the productivity of researchers ob-

served in our study is much more varied than in Lehman’s

definition.

We have further revealed that, when focusing on the

initial career years, most researchers in our study exhibit

an increasing productivity pattern.

This initial trend

emerges among clusters 4 to 10 and accounts for approx-

imately 80% of them. The high incidence of increasing

productivity patterns in early-career stages can likely be

attributed to the way funding and hiring decisions are

made in academia. Research has shown that productivity

plays a significant role in determining job placement [2]

and access to financial resources needed to continue re-

search [4, 5, 47–50]. Therefore, it is likely that the preva-

lence of early-rising trends in productivity reflects the

tendency to reward more productive researchers. On the

other hand, about half of the researchers in our sample

(those belonging to clusters 7 to 10 and 3) exhibit a de-

cline in productivity that is more often observed after

mid-career stages. Several hypotheses may account for

this pattern. For example, the consolidation of academic

prestige in late-career stages may reduce the urgency of

maintaining high productivity [51]. The tension between

time spent performing scientific research, which is ar-

guably often larger for young researchers, and adminis-

trative tasks, which in turn is usually larger for senior

researchers, may also be partly responsible for the de-


## DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


We have performed a comprehensive analysis of pro-

ductivity trajectories for over eight thousand researchers

from 56 different research disciplines.

Unlike previous

studies that have focused on specific disciplines [19–

21, 25], inferred typical productivity curves from aver-

aged behavior [8–14, 16, 17, 19–23], or assumed particular

forms of productivity trajectories beforehand [14, 15, 24,

25], we have evaluated pairwise similarities among these

trajectories, and accounted for inflation, different scales,

and random fluctuations of productivity curves. More-

over, our research uses a comprehensive dataset with no

issues involving name disambiguation that offers system-

atic coverage of Brazilian scientists across different areas

and generations, which in turn contributes to reducing

the so-called “WEIRD bias” [45] in science of science

studies. Our approach revealed clusters of productivity

trajectories that are internally consistent, more cohesive

than null models, and robust against data subsampling,

as well as that are in semantic agreement with human val-

idation. In addition, our clustering procedure resulted in

a network representation where researchers and clusters

with similar productivity patterns are closely connected.

We have uncovered a range of productivity patterns that

go beyond the traditional narrative and can be classi-

fied into six universal categories:

constant, u-shaped,

decreasing, periodic-like, increasing, and canonical-like

curves. When combined, constant, u-shaped, decreasing,

and periodic-like curves account for slightly more than a

quarter of researchers, while the majority of researchers,

nearly three-fourths, exhibit canonical-like or increasing

patterns.

We have also investigated possible career length and

cohort effects on the prevalence of the different produc-

tivity patterns. This analysis has revealed that all clus-

ters encompass a broad range of career lengths, but in-

creasing productivity curves are the dominant pattern

among researchers with shorter careers, who are also

younger scholars, while canonical-like curves are the most

common pattern among senior researchers. We have hy-

pothesized that the higher incidence of increasing pro-

ductivity patterns among younger scholars may be linked

to changes in the scientific enterprise, such as increased

collaboration [26, 46] and pressure on scholars (particu-

larly on young scientists [43]) to publish in large quan-

tities [5, 29, 44], but also to the fact that early-career

patterns may evolve as young researchers progress in

their careers.

While identifying clear generational ef-

fects in the prevalence of productivity patterns would

require data on the entire careers of different scientist

cohorts, we have partially tested our hypotheses by com-

paring the initial career years of senior scientists with

the careers of young scholars. These results showed that

almost half of the canonical-like curves among senior re-

searchers are classified as increasing patterns in the be-

ginning. Conversely, only 9% of senior researchers who

exhibited early-career increasing productivity sustained



8

completion date. We filled in missing information using

the CrossRef API (via the DOI reference of the papers)

and filtered out researchers with missing doctorate con-

clusion date or discipline information. Additionally, we

only considered researchers with ten or more career years,

the same threshold used by Way et al. [25].

cline in productivity during late-career stages [17, 52, 53].

Parenthood may also contribute to a drop in productivity

since time spent on research is typically reduced in such

circumstances [54]. Finally, the hardly avoidable decline

in intellectual potential over time may also be related to

a reduction in productivity with career progression [15].

In conclusion, our research reveals that the scientific

productivity of a significant number of researchers in-

creases during their early careers and declines after reach-

ing mid-career. However, the presence of six universal

productivity patterns and the wide variability among dif-

ferent cohorts caution against relying on stereotypes in

funding and tenure decisions. We hope that our findings

will inspire further investigations into the characteristics

that define each cluster of researchers and contribute to a

more comprehensive and inclusive evaluation of scholarly

performance.

Deflated, standardized, and smoothed productivity

series

The volume of scientific production has been consis-

tently increasing over time, as observed in both indi-

vidual and aggregate productivity levels [18, 30, 31].

However, this increase in productivity, or productivity

inflation, does not affect all disciplines equally and is

likely influenced by varying publication practices among

them [18, 56, 57]. In our study, we found that researchers

present an overall rise in productivity of approximately

0.8 papers/year per decade, and this inflation varies

among disciplines (Figs. S2 and S3 [32]).

For exam-

ple, while productivity has increased by approximately

2.1 papers/year per decade among researchers working

in medicine, it has only risen by approximately 0.7 pa-

pers/year per decade among physicists. To account for

this discipline-specific inflation, we followed Petersen et

al. [33] and calculated a deflated measure of productivity

defined as


## METHODS



## Data


The dataset used in our study was extracted from the

Lattes Platform (Plataforma Lattes) [55]. This platform

is hosted and maintained by the Brazilian National Coun-

cil for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq –

Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cient´ıfico e Tec-

nol´ogico), a governmental agency that promotes scientific

and technological research in Brazil. The Lattes Platform

contains a consolidated national database of curriculum

vitae (CV), research groups, and institutions in a stan-

dardized form. Furthermore, the Lattes CV has become

the official curriculum vitae for Brazilian researchers and

is widely used by science funding agencies and universi-

ties in performance evaluations. The platform contains a

wide range of information for each researcher, including

basic data such as discipline, workplace history, and cur-

rent affiliation, as well as more detailed information such

as academic mentorship relationships and scientific pro-

duction records. Compared to other datasets, our data

based on the Lattes Platform has the main advantage

of solving issues related to author name disambiguation

as well as ensuring comprehensive coverage of scientists

across diverse academic disciplines.

We initially selected the CVs of the 14,487 researchers

from 88 disciplines holding the CNPq Research Produc-

tivity Fellowship as of May 2017.

The total scientific

output of these researchers comprises 1,121,652 publica-

tions. The CNPq fellowship has been awarded to scholars

presenting outstanding scientific impact and innovation

in their respective areas of knowledge since the 1970s.

These researchers, commonly regarded as the elite of the

Brazilian scientific community, are required to maintain

a complete and up-to-date record of their research ac-

tivities on the Lattes Platform. To construct the pro-

ductivity trajectories, we collected the yearly publication

records of each researcher starting from the doctorate

pj(y) = pj(y)µp(2015)

µp(y)

,

where pj(y) is the raw productivity of researcher j in

year y and µp(y) is the average value of productivity of

his/her discipline in year y. We used the Huber robust

estimator [58] for location (as implemented in the Python

package statsmodels [59]) to estimate the average produc-

tivity of each discipline and account for outlier observa-

tions (Fig. S23 [32]).

Additionally, we only estimated

the average productivity of disciplines for years contain-

ing the publication of records of at least 50 researchers,

discarding all researchers with at least one year without

their discipline’s average productivity estimate. This ap-

proach yielded our final dataset comprising the deflated

productivity trajectories of 8,493 researchers divided into

56 research disciplines (Fig. S24 [32]).

To make the deflated productivity trajectories compa-

rable in scale, we further standardized their values by

calculating the z-score productivity Pj(y) for researcher

j in year y via

Pj(y) = pj(y) −E[pj]

S[pj]

,

where E[pj] is the average and S[pj] is the standard de-

viation of deflated productivity along the entire career

of researcher j. The noisy nature of productivity trajec-

tories (Fig. S25 [32]) also poses a challenge in estimat-

ing dissimilarity measures among them. These fluctua-

tions reflect the intrinsic nature of scientific publishing,



9

and discarded the low-dimensional representation pro-

duced by UMAP, mapping thus the clustering of time

series into a community detection problem. Specifically,

we applied the map equation [64, 65] and the hierarchi-

cal map equation [66], the so-called Infomap approach,

to determine the community structure of the UMAP net-

work. Infomap is a network clustering technique based

on concepts of information theory that relies on random

walks as a proxy for information flow over the network.

This method is one of the best-performing in detecting

planted partitions in benchmark graphs [38–40] and is

capable of identifying network partitions (clusters and

sub-clusters) where the random walker is more likely to

spend time. The map equation and the hierarchical map

equation represent the theoretical limits of how concisely

one can describe an infinite random walk on the network

(the description length) with a particular partition con-

figuration. By minimizing the map equation or the hier-

archical map equation, Infomap uncovers the community

structure of the network. We used the Infomap imple-

mentation available in the Python package infomap [67]

with default parameters and tested both the standard

two-level model and the hierarchical model. We verified

that the hierarchical map equation more effectively esti-

mates the network’s modular structure (that is, it yields

smaller description lengths when compared with the two-

level model) and was therefore chosen as our clustering

algorithm. We ran one thousand realizations of the In-

fomap algorithm by varying the seed parameter in each

iteration and found visually similar community struc-

tures. However, we defined the best network partition as

the one maximizing the silhouette coefficient [37] among

all partitions with the modal number of clusters. Finally,

we verified that the Louvain [41] and the Leiden [42] (as

used by Lee et al. [36]) community detection algorithms

also resulted in similar clustering patterns (Figs. S6 and

S7 [32]).

as every work goes through a time-consuming and non-

deterministic process of reasoning, testing, writing, and

peer-review evaluation [60]. The exact point in time a pa-

per is published often does not reflect the actual comple-

tion time of the work. To address this issue, we applied a

Gaussian smoothing filter to all z-score productivity se-

ries (as implemented in the Python SciPy package [61]).

This filter assigns Gaussian weights with a standard de-

viation σ centered on each data point and uses these

weights to average the time series values through a con-

volution process. The parameter σ controls the degree of

smoothing and defines a time scale for averaging the pro-

ductivity values over neighboring years (Fig. S26 [32]).

We used σ = 2 years for all results in the main text, but

similar clustering patterns were obtained when varying

σ from 1.0 to 2.5 years in half-year intervals (Figs. S27,

S28, and S29 [32]). By applying the Gaussian filter on

the z-score productivity trajectories, we ensured that the

smoothing was uniformly applied across researchers with

different productivity variability.

Time series clustering

We estimated the similarities between all pairs of pre-

processed productivity trajectories using the dynamic

time warping (DTW) algorithm [34] (as implemented

in the Python package dtaidistance [62]). The DTW is

a shape-based dissimilarity measure that allows for op-

timal alignment of sequences by creating a non-linear

warping path between them, providing more flexibility

for matching sequences that show similar patterns but

are shifted in time. The resulting dissimilarity matrix

was then used as a precomputed metric in the uniform

manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) dimen-

sionality reduction algorithm [35] (as implemented in the

Python package umap [63] and with default parameters).

UMAP first creates a fuzzy simplicial complex, which can

be represented as a weighted graph, and then projects the


## data into a lower-dimensional space via a force-directed


graph layout algorithm. The first step of the algorithm

thus creates a network representation of the dissimilarity

matrix, where nodes represent researchers and weighted

edges connect researchers with similar productivity tra-

jectories.

Following the recent work of Lee et al. [36] in Neuro-

science, we used only the network topological structure


## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The authors acknowledge the support of the Coor-

dena¸c˜ao de Aperfei¸coamento de Pessoal de N´ıvel Superior

(CAPES), the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento

Cient´ıfico e Tecnol´ogico (CNPq – Grant 303533/2021-8),

and the Slovenian Research Agency (Grants J1-2457 and

P1-0403).

[1] R. Merton and N. Storer, The Sociology of Science:

Theoretical and Empirical Investigations (University of

Chicago Press, 1973).

[2] A. Clauset, S. Arbesman, and D. B. Larremore, System-

atic inequality and hierarchy in faculty hiring networks,

Science Advances 1, e1400005 (2015).

[3] D. Bertsimas, E. Brynjolfsson, S. Reichman, and J. Sil-

berholz, Or forum–tenure analytics:

Models for pre-

dicting research impact, Operations Research 63, 1246

(2015).

[4] P. Stephan, How Economics Shapes Science (Harvard

University Press, 2015).

[5] S. Meirmans, R. K. Butlin, A. Charmantier, J. En-

gelst¨adter, A. T. Groot, K. C. King, H. Kokko, J. M.

Reid, and M. Neiman, Science policies: How should sci-

ence funding be allocated? An evolutionary biologists’



10

perspective, Journal of Evolutionary Biology 32, 754

(2019).

[6] S. Fortunato, C. T. Bergstrom, K. B¨orner, J. A. Evans,

D. Helbing, S. Milojevi´c, A. M. Petersen, F. Radic-

chi, R. Sinatra, B. Uzzi, A. Vespignani, L. Waltman,

D. Wang, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Science of science, Science

359, eaao0185 (2018).

[7] L. Liu, B. F. Jones, B. Uzzi, and D. Wang, Data, mea-

surement and empirical methods in the science of science,

Nature Human Behaviour 7, 1046 (2023).

[8] H. C. Lehman, Age and Achievement, Vol. 33 (Princeton

University Press, 1953).

[9] H. C. Lehman, Men’s creative production rate at different

ages and in different countries, The Scientific Monthly

78, 321 (1954).

[10] W. Dennis, Age and productivity among scientists, Sci-

ence 123, 724 (1956).

[11] C. E. Behymer and R. T. Blackburn, Environmental

and Personal Attributes Related to Faculty Productivity

(ERIC Clearinghouse, 1975).

[12] S. Cole, Age and scientific performance, American jour-

nal of sociology 84, 958 (1979).

[13] K. L. Horner, J. P. Rushton, and P. A. Vernon, Relation

between aging and research productivity of academic psy-

chologists, Psychology and Aging 1, 319 (1986).

[14] S. G. Levin and P. E. Stephan, Research productivity

over the life cycle: Evidence for academic scientists, The

American Economic Review 81, 114 (1991).

[15] D. K. Simonton, Creative productivity: A predictive and

explanatory model of career trajectories and landmarks,

Psychological Review 104, 66 (1997).

[16] Y. Gingras, V. Lariviere, B. Macaluso, and J.-P. Ro-

bitaille, The effects of aging on researchers’ publication

and citation patterns, PLOS ONE 3, e4048 (2008).

[17] K. Rørstad and D. W. Aksnes, Publication rate expressed

by age, gender and academic position – a large-scale anal-

ysis of norwegian academic staff, Journal of Informetrics

9, 317 (2015).

[18] A. S. Sunahara, M. Perc, and H. V. Ribeiro, Associ-

ation between productivity and journal impact across

disciplines and career age, Physical Review Research 3,

033158 (2021).

[19] C. S. Spake, V. G. Zeyl, J. W. Crozier, V. Rao, and

L. K. Kalliainen, An analysis of publication trajectory

in plastic surgery across the decades, Journal of Plastic,

Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery 75, 439 (2022).

[20] R. Over, Does research productivity decline with age?,

[26] S. Wuchty, B. F. Jones, and B. Uzzi, The increasing dom-

inance of teams in production of knowledge, Science 316,

1036 (2007).

[27] A. N. Miller, S. G. Taylor, and A. G. Bedeian, Publish

or perish: Academic life as management faculty live it,

Career development international 16, 422 (2011).

[28] H. P. Van Dalen and K. Henkens, Intended and unin-

tended consequences of a publish-or-perish culture: A

worldwide survey, Journal of the American Society for

Information Science and Technology 63, 1282 (2012).

[29] L. A. Schimanski and J. P. Alperin, The evaluation of

scholarship in academic promotion and tenure processes:

Past, present, and future, F1000Research 7, 1 (2018).

[30] D.

J.

de

Solla

Price,

Little

Science,

Big

Science

(Columbia University Press, 1963).

[31] R. Sinatra, D. Wang, P. Deville, C. Song, and A.-L.

Barab´asi, Quantifying the evolution of individual scien-

tific impact, Science 354, aaf5239 (2016).

[32] Supplemental Material for Figs. S1–S29 and Table S1.

[33] A. M. Petersen, R. K. Pan, F. Pammolli, and S. Fortu-

nato, Methods to account for citation inflation in research

evaluation, Research Policy 48, 1855 (2019).

[34] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, Dynamic programming algorithm

optimization for spoken word recognition, IEEE Trans-

actions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 26,

43 (1978).

[35] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, UMAP: Uniform

Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension

Reduction, ArXiv 10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426 (2018).

[36] E. K. Lee, H. Balasubramanian, A. Tsolias, S. U.

Anakwe, M. Medalla, K. V. Shenoy, and C. Chan-

drasekaran, Non-linear dimensionality reduction on ex-

tracellular waveforms reveals cell type diversity in pre-

motor cortex, Elife 10, e67490 (2021).

[37] P. J. Rousseeuw, Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the in-

terpretation and validation of cluster analysis, Journal of

Computational and Applied Mathematics 20, 53 (1987).

[38] A. Lancichinetti and S. Fortunato, Community detection

algorithms: A comparative analysis, Physical Review E

80, 056117 (2009).

[39] S. Fortunato, Community detection in graphs, Physics

Reports 486, 75 (2010).

[40] S. Fortunato and D. Hric, Community detection in net-

works: A user guide, Physics Reports 659, 1 (2016).

[41] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and

E. Lefebvre, Fast unfolding of communities in large net-

works, Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Ex-

periment 2008, P10008 (2008).

[42] V. A. Traag, L. Waltman, and N. J. Van Eck, From Lou-

vain to Leiden: Guaranteeing well-connected communi-

ties, Scientific Reports 9, 1 (2019).

[43] K. Powell, Young, talented and fed-up: Scientists tell

their stories, Nature 538, 446 (2016).

[44] D. Moher,

F. Naudet,

I. A. Cristea,

F. Miedema,

J. P. Ioannidis, and S. N. Goodman, Assessing scien-

tists for hiring, promotion, and tenure, PLOS Biology

16, e2004089 (2018).

[45] J. J. Arnett, The neglected 95%: Why American psy-

chology needs to become less American, American Psy-

chologist 63, 602 (2016).

[46] L. Dan´us, C. Muntaner, A. Krauss, M. Sales-Pardo, and

R. Guimer`a, Differences in collaboration structures and

impact among prominent researchers in europe and north

america, EPJ Data Science 12, 12 (2023).

Higher Education 11, 511 (1982).

[21] R. Over, Is age a good predictor of research productiv-

ity?, Australian Psychologist 17, 129 (1982).

[22] D. C. Pelz and F. M. Andrews, Scientists in Organi-

zations: Productive Climates for Research and Develop-

ment (John Wiley, 1966).

[23] A. E. Bayer and J. E. Dutton, Career age and research-

professional activities of academic scientists, The Journal

of Higher Education 48, 259 (1977).

[24] S. Rinaldi, R. Cordone, and R. Casagrandi, Instabili-

ties in creative professions: A minimal model, Nonlinear

Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences volume 4, 255

(2000).

[25] S. F. Way, A. C. Morgan, A. Clauset, and D. B. Lar-

remore, The misleading narrative of the canonical fac-

ulty productivity trajectory, Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences 114, E9216 (2017).



11

[47] Nuffield

Council

on

Bioethics.

The


## findings


of

a

series

of

engagement

activities

exploring

the

culture

of

scientific

research

in

the

UK,

https://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/assets/pdfs/

The-culture-of-scientific-research-report.pdf,

[Acessed: January 2023].

[48] San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment,

https://sfdora.org/read/, [Accessed: January 2023].

[49] D. Hicks, P. Wouters, L. Waltman, S. D. Rijcke, and

I. Rafols, Bibliometrics: The Leiden Manifesto for re-

search metrics, Nature 520, 429 (2015).

[50] J. Wilsdon, The Metric Tide: Independent Review of the

Role of Metrics in Research Assessment and Manage-

ment (Sage, 2016).

[51] P. Bourdieu, The specificity of the scientific field and the

social conditions of the progress of reason, Social Science

Information 14, 19 (1975).

[52] P. Bourdieu, The peculiar history of scientific reason, So-

ciological Forum 6, 3 (1991).

[53] P. Bourdieu, Science of Science and Reflexivity (Polity

Press, 2004).

[54] A. C. Morgan, S. F. Way, M. J. Hoefer, D. B. Lar-

remore, M. Galesic, and A. Clauset, The unequal im-

pact of parenthood in academia, Science Advances 7,

eabd1996 (2021).

[55] Lattes Plataform, http://lattes.cnpq.br, [Acessed:

January 2023].

[56] H. Dundar and D. R. Lewis, Determinants of research

productivity in higher education, Research in Higher Ed-

ucation 39, 607 (1998).

[57] J. G. Foster, A. Rzhetsky, and J. A. Evans, Tradition

and innovation in scientists’ research strategies, Ameri-

can Sociological Review 80, 875 (2015).

[58] P. J. Huber, Robust Statistics (Wiley, 2004).

[59] S. Seabold and J. Perktold, statsmodels: Econometric

and statistical modeling with Python, in 9th Python in

Science Conference (2010).

[60] B.-C. Bj¨ork and D. Solomon, The publishing delay in

scholarly peer-reviewed journals, Journal of Informetrics

7, 914 (2013).

[61] P. Virtanen et al., SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms

for Scientific Computing in Python, Nature Methods 17,

261 (2020).

[62] W. Meert, K. Hendrickx, and T. Van Craenendonck,

dtaidistance.

[63] L. McInnes, J. Healy, N. Saul, and L. Grossberger,

UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projec-

tion, The Journal of Open Source Software 3, 861 (2018).

[64] M. Rosvall and C. T. Bergstrom, Maps of random walks

on complex networks reveal community structure, Pro-

ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 1118

(2008).

[65] M. Rosvall, D. Axelsson, and C. T. Bergstrom, The map

equation, The European Physical Journal Special Topics

178, 13 (2009).

[66] M. Rosvall and C. T. Bergstrom, Multilevel compression

of random walks on networks reveals hierarchical organi-

zation in large integrated systems, PLOS ONE 6, e18209

(2011).

[67] Infomap,

https://www.mapequation.org/infomap/,

[Acessed: January 2023].



Universal productivity patterns in research careers

,

Andre S. Sunahara,1 Matjaˇz Perc,2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and Haroldo V. Ribeiro1, ∗

1Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Estadual de Maring´a – Maring´a, PR 87020-900, Brazil

2Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Maribor, Koroˇska cesta 160, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia

3Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan

4Alma Mater Europaea, Slovenska ulica 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia

5Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefst¨adterstraße 39, 1080 Vienna, Austria

6Department of Physics, Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyungheedae-ro, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

(Dated: October 27, 2023)

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Number of researchers

600

400

200

0

10

20

30

40

Career length

Figure S1. Distribution of career lengths of researchers in our study. The bars represent a histogram of the career lengths, with

the vertical dotted line indicating the median career length. Researchers’ careers begin after the completion of their doctorate

and all researchers in our study have a career length of at least ten years.

∗hvr@dﬁ.uem.br



2

12.5

,

Average productivity

10.0

7.5

Physics

5.0

All

2.5

0.0

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure S2. The increase in productivity, or productivity inﬂation, across diﬀerent disciplines in our study. The gray curves

represent the average productivity of each discipline, with the blue curve highlighting the trend for Physics. The black curve

represents the overall trend when aggregating productivity across all disciplines.



3

4.82

Dentistry

4.50

Physiotherapy

3.81

Nursing

3.72

Physical Education

3.69

Pharmacy

3.33

Nutrition

2.81

Management

2.81

Public Health

2.75

Veterinary Medicine

2.74

Food Science

2.68

Agrary Engineering

2.57

Statistics

2.37

Forestry

2.32

Zootechnics

2.29

Microbiology

2.28

Production Engineering

2.15

Chemical Engineering

2.11

Medicine

2.02

Sanitary Engineering

1.99

Botany

1.91

Pharmacology

1.72

Physiology

1.63

Ecology

1.61

Materials Engineering

1.60

Genetics

1.60

Morphology

1.58

Parasitology

1.55

Agronomy

1.49

Oceanography

1.46

Zoology

1.45

Psychology

1.44

Biochemistry

1.31

Immunology

1.27

Chemistry

1.16

Civil Engineering

1.14

Mechanical Engineering

1.09

Computer Science

1.06

Biophysics

0.85

Geography

0.81

All

0.72

Electrical Engineering

0.72

Education

0.70

Astronomy

0.68

Economics

0.67

Geoscience

0.67

Physics

0.45

Mathematics

0.35

Architecture

0.31

Arts

0.25

Sociology

0.22

Philosophy

0.19

History

0.19

Linguistics

0.13

Languages

0.09

Communication

0.02

Anthropology

-0.18

Political Science

,

-2.0

-1.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

Productivity 10-year growth rate

Figure S3. Discipline-speciﬁc productivity growth rates. The bar plot shows the per-decade productivity growth rate for each

discipline in our study, as well as for the overall behavior of all disciplines combined (red bar). These rates were calculated by

ﬁtting a linear model to the evolution of the average productivity for each discipline and to the aggregate behavior of all of

them.



4

D

A

B

C

,

20

20

Researcher #2316

3

3

Productivity

Productivity

15

15

2

2

z-score

z-score

10

10

1

1

0

0

5

5

Gaussian ﬁlter

p(y)

Pj(y) = pj(y)

[pj]

[pj]

pj(y) = pj(y)

p(2015)

1

1

0

0

= 2 years

20

20

Researcher #2425

3

3

Productivity

Productivity

15

15

2

2

z-score

z-score

10

10

1

1

0

0

5

5

1

1

0

0

Deﬂated

Raw time series

Standardized

Smoothed

E

G

F

UMAP

Infomap

Dissimilarity matrix

UMAP network representation

Infomap network clustering

Calculate all pairwise dynamic time warping (DTW)

Figure S4. Description of the clustering procedure. (A) Raw productivity time series of two researchers selected as illustrative

examples. (B) Deﬂated productivity time series. The raw time series are deﬂated to account for the discipline-speciﬁc inﬂation in

productivity. The deﬂated productivity is obtained by dividing the raw productivity values by the corresponding average values

of productivity of the researcher’s discipline and multiplying the result by the average productivity of the discipline in 2015. (C)

Standardized productivity time series. The deﬂated time series are standardized to make trajectories comparable in scale among

researchers. The standardized version of the time series is obtained by subtracting the researcher’s average productivity from

his/her deﬂated productivity and dividing the result by the researcher’s standard deviation of the deﬂated productivity. (D)

Smoothed productivity time series. The time series are further smoothed to account for the noisy nature of scientiﬁc publishing.

The smoothed productivity is obtained by convolving the z-score productivity series with a Gaussian kernel with a standard

deviation of 2 years. The panel displays the time series before (gray markers) and after (black markers) the smoothing process

for comparison. (E) Pairwise dissimilarity measure among researcher’s productivity curves. This dissimilarity is estimated by

calculating the dynamic time warping (DTW) for all pairs of productivity trajectories. The DTW allows for optimal alignment

of sequences by creating a non-linear warping path between them and matching sequences with similar patterns that can be

shifted in time. The left panel shows the optimal alignment of the two illustrative examples, and the right panel displays

the dissimilarity matrix obtained after calculating all pairwise dissimilarities. (F) Network representation of the dissimilarity

matrix. The dissimilarity matrix is fed into the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) algorithm to obtain

a network representation of the productivity trajectories. Nodes represent researchers’ productivity trajectories and weighted

edges indicate the similarity between trajectories. The UMAP is a dimensionality reduction technique that ﬁrst creates a

fuzzy simplicial complex (represented as a weighted graph) and then projects the data into a lower dimensional space using

a force-directed graph layout algorithm. Only the weighted graph obtained in the ﬁrst step of the UMAP algorithm is used,

and the lower-dimensional representation of trajectories is discarded. (G) Clusters of productivity patterns. The best partition

is obtained by applying the Infomap clustering algorithm to the UMAP network representation. Infomap is a state-of-the-art

network clustering technique that uses random walks as a proxy for information ﬂow over the network, deﬁning clusters as

regions where the random walker is more likely to spend time in the network. To account for the stochastic nature of this

algorithm, one thousand realizations are performed with diﬀerent random seeds, and the best partition is selected as the

iteration with the maximum silhouette score of the modal number of clusters. Each color represents one of the ten clusters of

productivity patterns.



5

,

300

200

Count

100

0

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Number of clusters

Figure S5. Histogram of the number of network communities detected in one thousand realizations of the Infomap algorithm.

The number of communities varies between 7 and 14, with the majority (85%) of realizations resulting in 9 to 11 communities.

The modal number of partitions, occurring in 34% of realizations, is 10.



6

826 (9.7%)

722 (8.5%)

710 (8.4%)

703 (8.3%)

,

675 (7.9%)

633 (7.5%)

618 (7.3%)

503 (5.9%)

499 (5.9%)

407 (4.8%)

403 (4.7%)

397 (4.7%)

366 (4.3%)

334 (3.9%)

329 (3.9%)

220 (2.6%)

148 (1.7%)

Louvain

= 2.0 years

Figure S6. Clustering of researcher productivity curves using the Louvain community detection algorithm. The panels display

the productivity curves of researchers in each identiﬁed community, with the black curves representing the average behavior of

each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to the unit interval, and the numbers and fractions of

researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The clustering patterns obtained using the Louvain method are similar

to those obtained using the Infomap algorithm.



7

1,150 (13.5%)

1,102 (13.0%)

1,070 (12.6%)

974 (11.5%)

,

787 (9.3%)

767 (9.0%)

741 (8.7%)

733 (8.6%)

691 (8.1%)

478 (5.6%)

Leiden

= 2.0 years

Figure S7. Clustering of researcher productivity curves using the Leiden community detection algorithm. The panels display

the productivity curves of researchers in each identiﬁed community, with the black curves representing the average behavior of

each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to the unit interval, and the numbers and fractions of

researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The clustering patterns obtained using the Leiden method are similar

to those obtained using the Louvain and Infomap algorithms.



8

150

Infomap

Louvain

Leiden

5%

10%

25%

50%

75%

100%

Binomial

Shuffled

,

Probability distribution

100

50

0

0.10

0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Silhouette score

Figure S8. Assessing the consistency and signiﬁcance of the clustering of productivity trajectories using the silhouette coeﬃcient.

The silhouette coeﬃcient measures how similar each productivity series is to its own cluster when compared to other clusters.

It is calculated as the normalized average diﬀerence between the cohesion (the average intracluster distance) and separation

(the average nearest-cluster distance) for each series. The coeﬃcient ranges from -1 to 1, with higher values indicating a better

clustering conﬁguration. The vertical dashed lines indicate the silhouette score for the best Infomap partition, as well as for

the partitions obtained using the Louvain and Leiden algorithms. We observe that Infomap yields the highest silhouette score.

The blue-shaded curves show the probability distribution of silhouette coeﬃcients obtained after shuﬄing a given fraction

(indicated in the legend) of the cluster labels of the Infomap partition. We observe that the silhouette decreases as we increase

the fraction of shuﬄed labels and becomes negative before approaching zero, indicating that in the partitions obtained with

high fractions of shuﬄed labels, the time series are closer to neighboring clusters than to their own cluster, further reinforcing

the signiﬁcance of the partition obtained by Infomap. To verify the signiﬁcance of the clusters obtained through our procedure,

we compare the silhouette score calculated from the best Infomap partition with those obtained from two null models. The ﬁrst

null model generates artiﬁcial trajectories using a binomial distribution with parameters set to match the average productivity

of our data (4.37 papers/year). The second null model corresponds to synthetic trajectories generated by randomly shuﬄing

the productivity trajectories of each researcher in the dataset. For each null model, we create one thousand replicas with the

same number of trajectories and career size distribution of our dataset. For each replica, we apply the same procedures used to

cluster the actual productivity trajectories and calculate the silhouette coeﬃcient of the resulting partition. The black and pink

curves represent the probability distributions of the silhouette scores calculated from the two null models (as indicated in the

legend). The average silhouette obtained from the null models is signiﬁcantly lower than the value obtained from the data, and

no realization of either model yields silhouette scores higher than the one obtained from the data. These results demonstrate

the signiﬁcance of the clusters obtained from the actual trajectories and show that they are not algorithmic artifacts.



9

A

B

,

1

8

2

3

7

4

Dynamic time warping

6

5

5

6

4

7

3

8

2

9

1

10

0

Figure S9.

Dynamic time warping (DTW) dissimilarity measure among all pairs of researchers’ productivity trajectories.

(A) Matrix plot of the DTW dissimilarity matrix without grouping researchers using the community structure of the UMAP

network. (B) Matrix plot of the DTW dissimilarity matrix after grouping researchers using the community structure of the

UMAP network. The colors surrounding the matrix refer to each of the ten communities identiﬁed by Infomap. Similarly, the

colored squares within the matrix representation indicate each of these groups of researchers. We observe that the communities

of the UMAP network yield a block diagonal form in the dissimilarity matrix, reﬂecting both local and global structures of the

similarities among researchers’ trajectories.



10

Derivative of the

z-score productivity

Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

,

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

Derivative of the

z-score productivity

Cluster 6

Cluster 7

Cluster 8

Cluster 9

Cluster 10

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

Figure S10. Derivatives of the productivity trajectories in each cluster obtained from the best Infomap partition (Figure 1

in the main text). The curves in each panel show the moving average of the diﬀerentiated productivity trajectories, with

the shaded regions representing 95% conﬁdence intervals. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to the

unit interval before estimating the averages. Positive values indicate increasing productivity rates, negative values indicate

decreasing productivity rates, and values close to zero indicate constant productivity in consecutive career years. Based on

these curves and the average behavior of productivity in each cluster, we have deﬁned six categories of productivity narratives:

constant (cluster 1), u-shaped (cluster 2), decreasing (cluster 3), periodic-like (cluster 4), increasing (clusters 5 and 6), and

canonical-like (clusters 7 to 10).



11

,

0.5

z-score productivity

0.0

Cluster 7

Cluster 8

Cluster 9

Cluster 10

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized career length

Figure S11. Diﬀerences among the average productivity behavior within the canonical-like clusters. The colored curves represent

the average productivity trajectories for each of the four clusters that compose the canonical-like category (clusters 7 to 10, as

indicated in the legend). The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to the unit interval. These clusters are

distinguished by distinct peak positions and amplitudes, as outlined in Table S1.



12

A

B

0.35

Equally distributed

in 3 categories

Equally distributed

in 2 categories

,

Constant

0.62

0.06

0.10

0.07

0.02

0.14

0.30

Entire data classication

0.6

Fraction of careers

U-shaped

0.09

0.68

0.02

0.05

0.15

0.01

0.25

Probability

Decreasing

0.05

0.13

0.75

0.01

0.00

0.05

0.20

0.4

0.15

Periodic

0.05

0.08

0.00

0.54

0.20

0.13

0.10

0.2

Increasing

0.02

0.07

0.00

0.04

0.75

0.11

0.05

Canonical

0.05

0.00

0.04

0.05

0.11

0.74

0.0

0.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized entropy

U-shaped

Decreasing

Periodic

Constant

Canonical

Increasing

Subsamples classiﬁcation

C

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Entropy

10

9

8

7

4

5

6

1

3

2

Figure S12. Validation of the robustness of the six categories of productivity patterns by subsampling the data into three

equal-sized parts. The validation consists in conducting ten realizations of the clustering procedure on the subsamples obtained

by dividing the complete data into three equal-sized parts. We verify that the obtained clusters can be classiﬁed into the same

six categories of productivity trajectories found for the entire dataset. Researchers are then assigned to these categories and the

robustness of the classiﬁcation can be assessed by comparing the labels obtained from the subsamples with those of the complete


## dataset. (A) Average confusion matrix associated with the entire data classiﬁcation (rows) and the subsamples classiﬁcation


(columns) calculated using the thirty subsamples. The average accuracy of the subsample classiﬁcation (73%) is signiﬁcantly

higher than the ones of dummy classiﬁers using mode (39%), stratiﬁed (29%), and uniform (16%) strategies.

The matrix

exhibits a mostly diagonal pattern, with diﬀerences primarily occurring when periodic trajectories are labeled as increasing or

canonical curves. (B) Histogram of the normalized entropy associated with the assignment probabilities of each pattern for every

researcher across the ten realizations. To calculate these entropy values, we ﬁrst estimate the fractions [(p1, p2, . . . , p6)] that

each productivity category (constant, u-shaped, decreasing, periodic, increasing, and canonical) is attributed to each researcher

across the ten realizations of the subsampling strategy. Then, the normalized entropy of each researcher is calculated using the

standard Shannon’s entropy formula (h = −

1

log 6 ∑6

i=1 pi log pi). Horizontal dashed lines indicate the values of the normalized

entropy for the cases in which labels are equally distributed in two or three categories for a researcher.

Approximately

80% of researchers display normalized entropy below 0.5, indicating consistent classiﬁcation within the same category across

realizations. Additionally, about one-third of researchers present zero entropy, that is, they are always assigned to the same

category. (C) Network representation where nodes represent researchers and weights correspond to the similarity between pairs

of trajectories. The black lines approximately delimit the ten clusters of productivity curves (indicated in the panel by their

numbers and patterns), while the blue shades correspond to the normalized entropy values. We note that researchers displaying

higher entropy are more frequently located in the frontier between two or more clusters, and in the overlapping region between

the periodic (cluster 4) and increasing with declining rates (cluster 5) trajectories.



13

A

B

0.35

0.8

Equally distributed

in 2 categories

Equally distributed

in 3 categories

,

Constant

0.64

0.08

0.11

0.02

0.02

0.13

0.30

Entire data classication

Fraction of careers

U-shaped

0.10

0.69

0.02

0.04

0.14

0.01

0.6

0.25

Probability

Decreasing

0.10

0.18

0.69

0.01

0.00

0.03

0.20

0.4

0.15

Periodic

0.06

0.09

0.00

0.53

0.18

0.14

0.10

Increasing

0.03

0.07

0.00

0.05

0.65

0.20

0.2

0.05

Canonical

0.06

0.00

0.05

0.06

0.02

0.81

0.0

0.00

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized entropy

U-shaped

Decreasing

Canonical

Periodic

Constant

Increasing

Subsamples classiﬁcation

C

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Entropy

10

9

8

7

4

5

6

1

3

2

Figure S13. Validation of the robustness of the six categories of productivity patterns by subsampling the data into two halves.

The validation consists in conducting ten realizations of the clustering procedure on the subsamples obtained by dividing the

complete data into two halves. We verify that the obtained clusters can be classiﬁed into the same six categories of productivity

trajectories found for the entire dataset. Researchers are then assigned to these categories and the robustness of the classiﬁcation

can be assessed by comparing the labels obtained from the subsamples with those of the complete dataset. (A) Average confusion

matrix associated with the entire data classiﬁcation (rows) and the subsamples classiﬁcation (columns) calculated using the

twenty subsamples. The average accuracy of the subsample classiﬁcation (71%) is signiﬁcantly higher than the ones of dummy

classiﬁers using mode (39%), stratiﬁed (29%), and uniform (16%) strategies. The matrix exhibits a mostly diagonal pattern,

with diﬀerences primarily occurring when periodic trajectories are labeled as increasing or canonical curves. (B) Histogram

of the normalized entropy associated with the assignment probabilities of each pattern for every researcher across the ten

realizations. To calculate these entropy values, we ﬁrst estimate the fractions [(p1, p2, . . . , p6)] that each productivity category

(constant, u-shaped, decreasing, periodic, increasing, and canonical) is attributed to each researcher across the ten realizations

of the subsampling strategy.

Then, the normalized entropy of each researcher is calculated using the standard Shannon’s

entropy formula (h = −

1

log 6 ∑6

i=1 pi log pi). Horizontal dashed lines indicate the values of the normalized entropy for the cases

in which labels are equally distributed in two or three categories for a researcher. Approximately 80% of researchers display

normalized entropy below 0.5, indicating consistent classiﬁcation within the same category across realizations. Additionally,

about one-third of researchers present zero entropy, that is, they are always assigned to the same category.

(C) Network

representation where nodes represent researchers and weights correspond to the similarity between pairs of trajectories. The

black lines approximately delimit the ten clusters of productivity curves (indicated in the panel by their numbers and patterns),

while the blue shades correspond to the normalized entropy values. We note that researchers displaying higher entropy are more

frequently located in the frontier between two or more clusters, and in the overlapping region between the periodic (cluster 4)

and increasing with declining rates (cluster 5) trajectories.



14

A

B

,

0.8

Constant

5

0.75

0.03

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.15

0.06

53

1

0

1

0

74

Cluster-based classication

Cluster-based classication

80

Fraction of careers

Number of careers

U-shaped

6

0.09

0.69

0.00

0.04

0.05

0.03

0.10

0

13

0

32

0

45

0.6

60

Decreasing

7

0.07

0.14

0.20

0.47

0.01

0.00

0.10

5

0

11

4

0

0

0.4

40

Periodic

8

0.14

0.09

0.01

0.00

0.50

0.06

0.21

16

0

0

2

0

0

Increasing

9

0.09

0.07

0.02

0.00

0.04

0.62

0.16

0

0

0

18

90

0

0.2

20

Canonical

10

0.05

0.03

0.00

0.01

0.03

0.11

0.78

1

0

0

2

0

0

0.0

0

Decreasing

Decreasing

Canonical

Canonical

Constant

Constant

Periodic

Periodic

Increasing

Increasing

No consensus

U-shaped

U-shaped

Experts' classiﬁcation

Experts' classiﬁcation

C

Misclassiﬁcation

No consensus

10

9

8

7

4

5

6

1

3

2

Figure S14. Human validation of the six categories of productivity patterns. A panel of two experts was recruited to classify

25% of the trajectories from our dataset, which was randomly sampled in a stratiﬁed manner. They were introduced to the

average pattern of each productivity cluster (for comparison purposes) alongside an interactive application where the z-scores

and smoothed trajectories are individually displayed. Six buttons corresponding to the productivity patterns found using the

complete dataset are provided to classify trajectories alongside an additional button in case they disagree on the classiﬁcation.

(A) Confusion matrix associated with the cluster-based classiﬁcation (rows) and the expert classiﬁcation (columns).

The

accuracy of the experts’ classiﬁcation (73%) is signiﬁcantly higher than the ones of dummy classiﬁers using mode (39%),

stratiﬁed (29%), and uniform (16%) strategies.

The matrix displays a mostly diagonal pattern, with diﬀerences primarily

occurring when the experts classify decreasing trajectories as u-shaped curves and periodic trajectories as canonical curves.

Periodic and u-shaped trajectories are proportionally the categories with the most discordance between the two experts. (B)

Confusion matrix associated with the cluster-based classiﬁcation (rows) and the expert classiﬁcation (columns) for the clusters

in the increasing and canonical categories. The increasing with declining rates (cluster 5) and late peak (cluster 9) productivity

trajectories are most frequently confused with each other. (C) Network representation where nodes represent researchers and

weights correspond to the similarity between pairs of trajectories.

The black lines approximately delimit the ten clusters

of productivity curves (indicated in the panel by their numbers and patterns). The orange markers represent misclassiﬁed

trajectories (experts’ classiﬁcations that do not agree with the classiﬁcation obtained from our clustering procedure), while

green markers indicate trajectories for which there was no consensus between the two experts. Similar to the subsampling

validation analysis, both types of inconsistency are more frequently in the frontier between two or more clusters and in the

overlapping region between periodic (cluster 4) and increasing with declining rates (cluster 5) patterns.



15

2,800

careers

3,051

careers

1,857

careers

785

careers

,

0.11

0.06

0.03

0.01

1

0.25

0.07

0.07

0.05

0.03

2

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.05

3

0.20

Fraction of careers

0.02

0.07

0.09

0.07

4

0.15

0.18

0.10

0.07

0.02

5

0.27

0.23

0.21

0.17

6

0.10

0.04

0.05

0.04

0.03

7

0.11

0.13

0.16

0.18

8

0.05

0.10

0.13

0.14

0.18

9

0.02

0.07

0.13

0.27

10

0.00

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

Figure S15.

Career length and cohort eﬀects on the prevalence of productivity patterns.

The prevalence of productivity

patterns in each of the ten clusters across four categories of career length: 10-14 years, 15-19 years, 20-24 years, and greater

than 24 years. In the increasing category, we observe that the always-increasing pattern of cluster 6 is more prevalent than the

increasing with declining rate pattern of cluster 5 across all categories of career length. This diﬀerence is the smallest (27% vs

18%) among the youngest cohort and the largest (17% vs 2%) among the most senior researchers. In the canonical category

(clusters 7 to 10), we note that the patterns of clusters 8 and 9 are the most prevalent across all categories of career length,

except among the most senior researchers, where the pattern of cluster 10 is most prevalent. The early-stage peak pattern of

cluster 7 is less prevalent across all categories of career length, except among the youngest researchers, where the pattern of

cluster 10 is less prevalent.



16

,

Decreasing

Constant

U-shaped

Periodic

Increasing

Canonical

Agronomy

Biochemistry

Chemistry

Geoscience

159

careers

173

careers

144

careers

66

careers

79

careers

108

careers

106

careers

58

careers

171

careers

185

careers

170

careers

137

careers

77

careers

98

careers

95

careers

44

careers

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.20

0.22

0.27

Fraction of careers

0.21

0.11

0.28

0.34

0.30

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.37

0.39

0.36

0.47

0.36

0.48

0.47

0.38

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.47

0.57

0.70

0.68

0.56

0.64

0.52

0.48

0.41

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.23

0.36

0.39

0.24

0.35

0.31

0.26

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

Languages

Mathematics

Medicine

Physics

38

careers

63

careers

52

careers

24

careers

58

careers

53

careers

53

careers

24

careers

114

careers

155

careers

146

careers

76

careers

180

careers

162

careers

171

careers

239

careers

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.21

0.23

0.11

0.08

Fraction of careers

0.17

0.34

0.26

0.06

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.41

0.29

0.32

0.46

0.35

0.29

0.48

0.34

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.71

0.58

0.70

0.58

0.67

0.61

0.45

0.47

0.31

0.41

0.40

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.24

0.37

0.31

0.34

0.21

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

Figure S16. Prevalence of productivity patterns among diﬀerent disciplines in our study. The panels show the prevalence

of productivity patterns across four categories of career length (10-14, 15-19, 20-24, and greater than 24 years) for eight

disciplines, each having more than twenty researchers in each length category. We note that the main patterns observed when

aggregating all disciplines also emerge when considering disciplines separately. Speciﬁcally, increasing productivity curves are

the dominant pattern among researchers with shorter careers, while canonical-like curves are the most prevalent pattern among

senior researchers. However, there are variations in the prevalence of speciﬁc patterns among the disciplines. While 45% of

all researchers among the youngest cohort show increasing productivity curves, the prevalence of this pattern is lower among

researchers working on Biochemistry, Languages, and Physics (34% to 41% of researchers).

For the other ﬁve disciplines

(Agronomy, Chemistry, Geoscience, Mathematics, and Medicine), the prevalence of increasing patterns among the youngest

researchers is only slightly higher (46% to 48% of researchers) than the fraction obtained for the aggregated case. Among the

most experienced cohort, we observe that ﬁve disciplines (Agronomy, Chemistry, Languages, Mathematics, and Medicine) have

a higher prevalence (from 67% to 71% of researchers) and three disciplines (Biochemistry, Geoscience, and Physics) have a

lower prevalence (48% to 64% of researchers) of canonical patterns when compared with the aggregated case, in which 65%

of researchers exhibit canonical-like curves. Additionally, we note that only Biochemistry shows an approximately constant

fraction of increasing curves and a fraction of canonical curves that does not monotonically increase across the length categories.

Except for Mathematics, which exhibits a relatively higher prevalence of constant trajectories across the length categories, all

other disciplines follow the same pattern observed in the aggregated case. The prevalence of u-shaped trajectories among each

discipline is similar to the pattern obtained for the aggregated case, with only Languages and Mathematics not presenting this

pattern among the most experienced cohort. Decreasing trajectories display a similar decline trend across the length categories

observed in the aggregated case for four disciplines (Agronomy, Biochemistry, Chemistry, and Languages), while the remaining

four (Geoscience, Mathematics, Medicine, and Physics) present approximately constant fractions. Finally, the prevalence of

periodic-like curves is lower among shorter careers and tends to increase across the length categories, similar to the behavior

observed in the aggregated case.



17

,

Decreasing

Constant

U-shaped

Periodic

Increasing

Canonical

Agronomy

Biochemistry

Chemistry

Geoscience

159

careers

173

careers

144

careers

66

careers

79

careers

108

careers

106

careers

58

careers

171

careers

185

careers

170

careers

137

careers

77

careers

98

careers

95

careers

44

careers

0.35

0.08

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.11

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.12

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.17

0.06

0.03

0.02

1

1

1

1

0.06

0.09

0.03

0.05

0.09

0.08

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.09

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.06

0.02

2

2

2

2

0.30

0.16

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.09

0.06

0.08

0.01

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.07

0.08

0.05

0.03

0.02

3

3

3

3

Fraction of careers

0.25

0.00

0.07

0.06

0.14

0.01

0.08

0.08

0.03

0.02

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.01

0.05

0.08

0.05

4

4

4

4

0.20

0.21

0.09

0.04

0.02

0.11

0.10

0.08

0.02

0.14

0.15

0.07

0.07

0.17

0.08

0.09

0.02

5

5

5

5

0.36

0.20

0.19

0.18

0.24

0.21

0.22

0.28

0.30

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.27

0.27

0.17

0.09

6

6

6

6

0.15

0.04

0.05

0.03

0.03

0.01

0.06

0.00

0.02

0.05

0.03

0.02

0.03

0.06

0.04

0.03

0.02

7

7

7

7

0.10

0.08

0.14

0.14

0.14

0.08

0.13

0.12

0.12

0.11

0.12

0.18

0.17

0.06

0.13

0.15

0.25

8

8

8

8

0.18

0.17

0.15

0.18

0.12

0.18

0.22

0.23

0.10

0.12

0.18

0.09

0.08

0.12

0.13

0.26

9

9

9

9

0.05

0.01

0.06

0.16

0.21

0.03

0.11

0.25

0.35

0.02

0.08

0.12

0.28

0.01

0.05

0.16

0.14

10

10

10

10

0.00

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

Languages

Mathematics

Medicine

Physics

38

careers

63

careers

52

careers

24

careers

58

careers

53

careers

53

careers

24

careers

114

careers

155

careers

146

careers

76

careers

180

careers

162

careers

171

careers

239

careers

0.35

0.13

0.11

0.04

0.00

0.12

0.08

0.06

0.08

0.08

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.11

0.06

0.02

0.02

1

1

1

1

0.05

0.03

0.04

0.00

0.09

0.04

0.06

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.08

0.09

0.08

0.03

2

2

2

2

0.30

0.03

0.02

0.04

0.04

0.08

0.13

0.06

0.09

0.08

0.12

0.09

0.08

0.24

0.14

0.12

0.04

3

3

3

3

Fraction of careers

0.25

0.07

0.08

0.11

0.08

0.00

0.06

0.17

0.08

0.03

0.05

0.09

0.05

0.02

0.03

0.08

0.09

4

4

4

4

0.20

0.16

0.11

0.04

0.08

0.26

0.13

0.04

0.00

0.13

0.08

0.05

0.01

0.21

0.05

0.08

0.02

5

5

5

5

0.18

0.17

0.02

0.12

0.22

0.21

0.23

0.08

0.32

0.28

0.18

0.09

0.21

0.24

0.24

0.15

6

6

6

6

0.15

0.11

0.11

0.13

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.06

0.00

0.04

0.05

0.12

0.04

0.08

0.10

0.05

0.04

7

7

7

7

0.10

0.11

0.13

0.25

0.33

0.05

0.17

0.17

0.33

0.12

0.08

0.15

0.21

0.14

0.11

0.18

0.21

8

8

8

8

0.14

0.12

0.17

0.18

0.03

0.10

0.04

0.17

0.10

0.21

0.13

0.17

0.06

0.11

0.08

0.09

9

9

9

9

0.05

0.00

0.03

0.15

0.17

0.00

0.08

0.11

0.21

0.01

0.08

0.14

0.26

0.03

0.08

0.10

0.27

10

10

10

10

0.00

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

10-14

years

15-19

years

20-24

years

> 24

years

Figure S17.

Prevalence of productivity patterns in each of the ten clusters among diﬀerent disciplines in our study.

The

panels show the prevalence of each of the ten identiﬁed productivity patterns among eight disciplines, each having more than

twenty researchers in four diﬀerent categories of career length (10-14, 15-19, 20-24, and greater than 24 years). Similarly to the

observed in the aggregated case, the always-increasing pattern of cluster 6 is more prevalent than the increasing with declining

rate pattern of cluster 5 across all categories of career length and among almost all disciplines. The prevalence of these two

patterns also decreases across the length categories for all disciplines but Biochemistry. In the canonical category (clusters 7

to 10), similarly to the aggregated case, we observe that clusters 8 and 9 tend to be the most prevalent patterns across all

categories of career length and among most disciplines. However, while the pattern of cluster 10 is the most prevalent in the

most experienced cohort among ﬁve disciplines (Agronomy, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Medicine, and Physics), the pattern of

cluster 8 is most prevalent in the most experienced cohort among the remaining three disciplines (Geoscience, Languages, and

Mathematics). Finally, and as in the aggregated case, cluster 7 is less prevalent among all length categories and disciplines,

except for Languages which shows signiﬁcantly higher fractions for the three ﬁrst length categories.



18

A

r =

0.999

B

,

103

Number of researchers

10 to 14 years

15 to 19 years

20 to 24 years

> 24 years

40

Career length

102

30

101

20

10

100

1970

1980

1990

2000

Doctorate completion

1970

1980

1990

2000

Doctorate completion

Figure S18.

Career length is directly linked to the year of doctorate completion of each researcher and serves as a proxy

for grouping diﬀerent generations of scientists. (A) Histogram of the year of doctorate completion for all researchers in our

study. (B) Direct association between career length and year of doctorate completion. These two variables are almost perfectly

correlated since we assume each researcher’s career starts after his/her doctorate completion. The correlation is not perfect

because less than 1% of researchers had not updated their CVs in 2016 (one year before data collection).



19

,

Constant/Decreasing

U-shaped

Periodic

Increasing

Canonical

1

1,720 (20.3%)

2

638 (7.5%)

3

155 (1.8%)

4

548 (6.5%)

5

264 (3.1%)

6

600 (7.1%)

7

1,921 (22.6%)

8

606 (7.1%)

9

594 (7.0%)

10

1,447 (17.0%)

Infomap

= 2.0 years

considering the initial 14 years of the longest careers

Figure S19. Clustering of researcher productivity curves obtained when applying our clustering approach to the entire dataset,

but only considering the initial 14 career years of researchers with careers longer than 24 years.

The panels display the

productivity curves of researchers in each of the ten identiﬁed communities, with the black curves representing the average

behavior of each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled to the unit interval, and the numbers and

fractions of researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The ten clusters are further grouped into six categories:

constant/decreasing (cluster 1), u-shaped (cluster 2), periodic-like (clusters 3 and 4), increasing (clusters 5 to 7), and canonical-

like (clusters 8 to 10) curves. The clustering patterns are very similar to those obtained when considering the entire careers

of senior researchers. Only the constant and decreasing patterns (clusters 1 and 2 of Figure 1 in the main text) merged into a

single cluster (cluster 1) and the periodic-like curves (clusters 4 of Figure 1 in the main text) emerged as two patterns (clusters

3 and 4).



20

,

Constant/Decreasing

U-shaped

Periodic

Increasing

Canonical

Derivative of the

z-score productivity

Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

Derivative of the

z-score productivity

Cluster 6

Cluster 7

Cluster 8

Cluster 9

Cluster 10

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

0.0

0.5

1.0

Normalized career length

Figure S20. Derivatives of the productivity trajectories in each cluster obtained when considering the initial 14 career years of

researchers with careers longer than 24 years (Fig. S19). The curves in each panel show the moving average of the diﬀerentiated

productivity trajectories, with the shaded regions representing 95% conﬁdence intervals. The lengths of researchers’ careers in

each group are scaled to the unit interval before estimating the averages. Positive values indicate increasing productivity rates,

negative values indicate decreasing productivity rates, and values close to zero indicate constant productivity in consecutive

career years. Based on these curves and the average behavior of productivity in each cluster (Fig. S19), we have deﬁned six

categories of productivity narratives: constant/decreasing (cluster 1), u-shaped (cluster 2), periodic-like (clusters 3 and 4),

increasing (clusters 5 to 7), and canonical-like (clusters 8 to 10).



21

,

1

2

1

3

0.17

0.05

4

0.07

First 14 years of careers longer than 24 years

2

0.08

5

3

4

0.06

6

0.17

0.05

5

7

6

0.12

8

0.18

7

0.26

0.08

9

0.18

0.05

8

0.03

0.06

9

0.11

10

0.18

0.27

10

0.09

Figure S21. Comparison of the prevalence of productivity patterns in the initial career years of senior researchers with those

exhibited in later career stages, when considering the individual patterns of each productivity cluster. The left bars show

the fractions of productivity patterns in each cluster obtained when considering the initial 14 career years of researchers with

careers longer than 24 years, and the right ones show the prevalence of patterns in each cluster when considering the full range

of their careers. The connections between the left and right bars indicate the migration ﬂow among the productivity clusters.

In agreement with the results of Figure 2C of the main text, we observe that a signiﬁcant part of canonical senior careers

is classiﬁed as increasing curves in their beginnings, and that only a minor fraction of senior researchers who exhibit early-

career increasing productivity sustain this pattern with career progression. We further observe that most transitions between

increasing and canonical-like patterns occur from cluster 7 (always-increasing pattern) to clusters 9 and 10. Furthermore, the

transitions between increasing patterns are the most frequent between the always-increasing patterns of clusters 7 (left side)

and 6 (right side).



22

,

2

Constant/Decreasing

Canonical

3

U-shaped

Canonical

z-score productivity

z-score productivity

Researcher #7548

2

1

Standardized

Gaussian filter

Researcher #1357

1

0

0

1

1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Career year

0

5

10

15

20

25

Career year

Figure S22. Examples of atypical transitions between the productivity patterns obtained when considering the initial 14 career

years of researchers with careers longer than 24 years and those obtained for their entire careers. The left panel illustrates the

case of a senior researcher whose productivity pattern is initially classiﬁed as u-shaped but later progresses to a canonical-like

pattern. The right panel represents another atypical transition in which the career of a senior researcher is initially classiﬁed

as a constant/decreasing pattern and later as a canonical-like pattern. The central panel shows the network representation of

the similarities among researchers’ productivity patterns, highlighting the researchers’ location used to illustrate the atypical

transitions. We observe that both are localized on the border between two or more communities.



23

,

150

Productivity

100

50

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

Figure S23. Box plots of raw productivity of all researchers and each year covered by our dataset. We note that extreme

observations occur in almost all years. These outlier productivity values are indicated by black markers located beyond the

whiskers, deﬁned as 1.5 times the interquartile range.



24

,

29

Arts

131

Linguistics

177

Languages

30

Geography

65

Political Science

74

Philosophy

92

Anthropology

118

Sociology

196

History

235

Psychology

276

Education

1 Physical Education

7

Nutrition

15

Physiotherapy

64

Pharmacy

93

Nursing

138

Dentistry

148

Public Health

491

Medicine

21

Statistics

31

Oceanography

40

Astronomy

188

Mathematics

223

Computer Science

314

Geoscience

663

Chemistry

752

Physics

30

Sanitary Engineering

47

Production Engineering

91

Chemical Engineering

153

Civil Engineering

156

Mechanical Engineering

200

Materials Engineering

218

Electrical Engineering

17

Biophysics

59

Morphology

65

Parasitology

105

Immunology

109

Microbiology

121

Botany

125

Physiology

137

Pharmacology

142

Zoology

161

Ecology

244

Genetics

351

Biochemistry

24

Architecture

57

Communication

102

Management

119

Economics

33

Agrary Engineering

49

Forestry

109

Food Science

148

Zootechnics

167

Veterinary Medicine

542

Agronomy

Total: 8,493 researchers

Agrarian Sciences

Applied Social Sciences

Biological Sciences

Engineering

Exact and Earth Sciences

Health Sciences

Human Sciences

Linguistics, Languages and Arts

100

101

102

103

Number of researchers

Figure S24. Number of scholars in our study and their distribution among the research disciplines. The bars show the total

number of researchers for each discipline, while the color code indicates the diﬀerent areas of knowledge covered by our dataset.



25

15

30

,

Researcher #14

Cluster 9

Researcher #15

Researcher #184

30

10

Productivity

Productivity

Productivity

20

20

5

10

10

Cluster 5

Cluster 2

0

0

0

0

10

20

30

Career year

0

10

20

30

Career year

0

10

20

30

Career year

Figure S25. Illustration of the noisy nature of productivity trajectories. The panels show the raw productivity values of three

selected researchers. We observe that productivity displays ﬂuctuations which in turn reﬂect the complex processes involved

in producing and publishing scientiﬁc papers.



26

2

2

2

2

Researcher #15

,

Standardized

Gaussian filter

z-score productivity

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

Cluster 5

1

1

1

1

= 1.5 years

= 1.0 years

= 2.0 years

= 2.5 years

0

10

20

30

Career year

0

10

20

30

Career year

0

10

20

30

Career year

0

10

20

30

Career year

Figure S26.

Illustration of the diﬀerent degrees of smoothing obtained when varying the standard deviation of Gaussian

kernel used to ﬁlter the z-score productivity series. The panel shows the z-score productivity series (gray markers) and the

corresponding smoothed productivity series (black markers) obtained when varying the standard deviation σ from 1.0 to 2.5

years in half-year intervals.



27

1,805 (21.3%)

1,335 (15.7%)

1,067 (12.6%)

977 (11.5%)

,

950 (11.2%)

796 (9.4%)

565 (6.7%)

492 (5.8%)

337 (4.0%)

169 (2.0%)

Infomap

= 1.0 year

Figure S27. Clustering of researcher productivity curves using the Infomap community detection algorithm with time series

smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter with standard deviation σ = 1.0 year. This value is smaller than the one used for the results

in the main text (σ = 2.0 years). The panels display the productivity curves of researchers in each identiﬁed community, with

the black curves representing the average behavior of each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled

to the unit interval, and the numbers and fractions of researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The clustering

patterns obtained using σ = 1.0 year is similar to those obtained for σ ∈{1.5, 2.0, 2.5} years.



28

1,805 (21.3%)

1,251 (14.7%)

1,151 (13.6%)

818 (9.6%)

,

729 (8.6%)

622 (7.3%)

563 (6.6%)

559 (6.6%)

456 (5.4%)

403 (4.7%)

136 (1.6%)

Infomap

= 1.5 years

Figure S28. Clustering of researcher productivity curves using the Infomap community detection algorithm with time series

smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter with standard deviation σ = 1.5 years. This value is smaller than the one used for the results

in the main text (σ = 2.0 years). The panels display the productivity curves of researchers in each identiﬁed community, with

the black curves representing the average behavior of each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled

to the unit interval, and the numbers and fractions of researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The clustering

patterns obtained using σ = 1.5 years is similar to those obtained for σ ∈{1.0, 2.0, 2.5} years.



29

1,427 (16.8%)

1,356 (16.0%)

1,160 (13.7%)

1,125 (13.2%)

,

1,083 (12.8%)

1,042 (12.3%)

609 (7.2%)

394 (4.6%)

297 (3.5%)

Infomap

= 2.5 years

Figure S29. Clustering of researcher productivity curves using the Infomap community detection algorithm with time series

smoothed using a Gaussian ﬁlter with standard deviation σ = 2.5 years. This value is larger than the one used for the results

in the main text (σ = 2.0 years). The panels display the productivity curves of researchers in each identiﬁed community, with

the black curves representing the average behavior of each cluster. The lengths of researchers’ careers in each group are scaled

to the unit interval, and the numbers and fractions of researchers in each group are shown within each panel. The clustering

patterns obtained using σ = 2.5 years is similar to those obtained for σ ∈{1.0, 1.5, 2.0} years.



30

Table S1. Descriptive statistics of researchers in each productivity cluster. The amplitude column refers to the average value of

the diﬀerence between the minimum and maximum productivity in standard score units. The peak position column indicates

the average year of maximum productivity for all researchers in each cluster classiﬁed as a canonical-like pattern. Similarly,

the normalized peak position column refers to the average position of maximum productivity after re-scaling the lengths of

researchers’ careers in each group to the unit interval. In these three columns, the values after the ± sign represent one standard

deviation of the corresponding quantity.

Cluster

Number of researchers

Category

Median length

(years)

Amplitude

(standard units)

Peak position

(years)

Normalized peak position

1

542 (6.4%)

Constant

14

0.58 ± 0.19

-

-

2

533 (6.3%)

U-shaped

16

1.27 ± 0.38

-

-

3

663 (7.8%)

Decreasing

16

1.37 ± 0.41

-

-

4

469 (5.5%)

Periodic

19

1.26 ± 0.29

-

-

5

966 (11.4%)

Increasing

14

1.04 ± 0.26

-

-

6

1, 975 (23.3%)

Increasing

16

1.91 ± 0.32

-

-

7

375 (4.4%)

Canonical

17

1.37 ± 0.29

5.78 ± 2.97

0.33 ± 0.14

8

1, 136 (13.4%)

Canonical

18

1.16 ± 0.30

10.12 ± 4.42

0.55 ± 0.15

9

1, 107 (13.0%)

Canonical

18

1.72 ± 0.28

13.26 ± 4.54

0.73 ± 0.17

10

727 (8.6%)

Canonical

21

1.84 ± 0.27

11.64 ± 4.18

0.54 ± 0.13