Voice Passing : a Non-Binary Voice Gender Prediction System for evaluating

Transgender voice transition

David Doukhan1, Simon Devauchelle1, Lucile Girard-Monneron2, M´ıa Ch´avez Ruz3, V. Chaddouk3,

Isabelle Wagner2, Albert Rilliard4,5

1Institut National de l’Audiovisuel (INA), France; 2Hˆopital Tenon, AP-HP, France; 3Independent;

4Universit´e Paris Saclay, CNRS, LISN, France; 5Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

{ddoukhan, sdevauchelle}@ina.fr, lucile.monneron@aphp.fr, mia.chavezruz@gmail.com,

vancdk@pm.me, isabelle.wagner@aphp.fr, rilliard@lisn.fr


## Abstract


tice and gender perception. A program allowing transgender

persons to train their voice and measure their progress, and al-

lowing voice therapists to evaluate and develop their techniques

with a tool adapted to their daily needs. This tool thus (i) shall

take into account the complex characteristics of a voice (not

only F0); (ii) shall return a proportion of masculinity/femininity

so transgender persons may adapt the output to their own want.

To develop this service, machine learning (ML) algorithms were

trained to evaluate the voices’ gender, and their outputs were

tuned to the perceptual evaluation of a corpus of individual

voices by naive French listeners. This perceptual evaluation

and the setup of these algorithms, with their performance eval-

uation, is the topic of this paper. This study focuses on gender

perception within the French culture and language.

This paper presents a software allowing to describe voices using

a continuous Voice Femininity Percentage (VFP). This system

is intended for transgender speakers during their voice transition

and for voice therapists supporting them in this process. A cor-

pus of 41 French cis- and transgender speakers was recorded.

A perceptual evaluation allowed 57 participants to estimate the

VFP for each voice. Binary gender classification models were

trained on external gender-balanced data and used on overlap-

ping windows to obtain average gender prediction estimates,

which were calibrated to predict VFP and obtained higher ac-

curacy than F0 or vocal track length-based models. Training


## data speaking style and DNN architecture were shown to im-


pact VFP estimation. Accuracy of the models was affected by

speakers’ age. This highlights the importance of style, age, and

the conception of gender as binary or not, to build adequate sta-

tistical representations of cultural concepts.

Index Terms: Transgender voice, Gender perception, Speaker

gender classification, CNN, X-Vector

arXiv:2404.15176v1  [eess.AS]  23 Apr 2024


## 2. Related Work


Earlier gender prediction systems were based on LPC anal-

ysis [11],

MFCC gender-dependent HMM phone recog-

nizer [12], or Mel bands and pitch estimation HMM [13]. This

task was defined as a binary classification problem associated

with high accuracy estimates (> 95%), often considered as

solved.

However, the reported performances were not nec-

essarily comparable since accuracy depends on e.g., corpora,

sample duration, speech transcript, speaking style, speaker age,

and language. Recent studies, using pre-trained Transformer-

based acoustic features [14] or Convolutional Neural Networks

(CNN) trained on Mel bands [15, 16] , reported accuracy met-

rics above 90% on fixed-length speech samples (2 seconds, 680

ms, 30 seconds), but also gender classification biases defined

as accuracy differences between female and male speakers. For

transgender voices, classification systems used three gender cat-

egories: a male, female, and transgender system was fitted to

recordings of cis- and transgender (male & female) speakers,

with an accuracy of 83% [17]. The Trans-Voice App, used for

transgender auto-evaluation, has a decision function based on

a Multi-Layer Perceptron trained with a binary gender and ar-

bitrary thresholds to obtain masculine, feminine, and androgy-

nous voice categories. Its output was compared to speaker judg-

ments on their own speech, with an accuracy of 88% [18].

Categorical systems make it difficult to monitor the

speaker’s progress during their transition. Our working assump-

tion is to favor systems producing continuous gender estimates

fitted to human perception of gender. An LDA system based

on 29 acoustic features was trained on cisgender voices an-

notated on a continuous scale [19, 20]. While not addressing

transgender voices, this work required excerpts of at least 7 sec-

onds to obtain predictions correlated with perception and found

that mean F0, third and fourth formants, and vocal tract length

(VTL) were the most correlated features with perceived gender.


## 1. Introduction


Care of transgender people offers, among other things, support

for the modification of the gender perceived through their voice,

a main component of identity - particularly of gender iden-

tity [1]. During female-to-male transitions, the lowering of a

voice’s fundamental frequency (F0) is relatively easy to obtain

by taking testosterone, which produces a lengthening of vocal

folds and a masculinization of voice. Conversely, raising one’s

vocal pitch so the voice is perceived as female is more com-

plex, as taking female hormones does not influence the phona-

tory structure after puberty for males [2, 3]. However, voice’s

F0 is not the only criterion for identifying voice gender. Voice

quality (and typically vocal tract resonances) is also an impor-

tant determinant, while prosody, speech rhythm, and vocabulary

intervene as secondary cues [4, 5]. Beyond personal training,

transgender persons are offered care by voice therapists and,

if required, two types of vocal surgery that aim a raised voice

pitch: cricothyropexy and Wendler glottoplasty [6, 7] A recur-

rent question is how to evaluate this work and its outcome? (i.e.,

how do we estimate the gender that’ll be perceived from a voice

in a given language and culture?) Most available software (e.g.,

EvaF [8] or VoiceUp [9]) proposing the evaluation of voice mas-

culinity or femininity for non-expert essentially use voice F0.

While this measurement alone does not capture gender percep-

tion (an extra-high F0 may correspond to a falsetto voice, or

a very low F0 to a partial laryngectomy...), let alone not being

tuned to cultural variation [10].

This paper describes the setup and evaluation of a tool try-

ing to close the gap between the reality of voice therapy prac-




## 3. Cis- and transgender voices corpus


3.3. Perceptual evaluation results

Table 1 presents the proportion of Q1 answers by speaker’s cate-

gories. For cisgender speakers, a negligible amount of errors or

IDK answers were observed (resp. 0.4 and 0.2%) together with

shorter average RT: 3.4 and 3.7 seconds, versus 6.2 seconds for

TF speakers. Participants tend to attribute a binary gender cat-

egory to transgender voices, with a notable but modest increase

(5%) of IDK answers. Mean gender judgments are 0.539 for fe-

male listeners and 0.565 for male listeners. Wilcoxon rank sum

test shows no significant differences with probability >= 95%

between these 2 groups (W = 268.5, p-value = 0.1548).

3.1. Recording and analysis

41 speakers were recorded reading the French version of The

North Wind and the Sun. They were 8 cisgender males (CM),

12 cisgender females (CF), and 21 transgender females (TF),

with age varying between 20 and 69 years old (mean: 39). The

TF speakers had transgender voice therapy supervised by one

author of this study; none of them received surgical process-

ing of the vocal apparatus. All speakers signed an informed

consent form detailing the aims of the research project to allow

their voices to be used for research purposes only. Recordings

were made either at hospital Tenon AP-HP in a quiet room for

transgender and some cisgender speakers or at the LISN labo-

ratory for some cisgender voices. Recordings were made using

a microphone at about 30 cm from the speaker’s mouth, with a

Nacon microphone at the hospital or a Zoom H4n recorder with

its default microphones at the lab. The readings had an average

duration of 39 seconds, varying between 30 and 51 seconds.

F0 was estimated following recommendations in [21], com-

bining REAPER’s voicing estimation [22] with FCN-F0’s F0

estimation [23]. F0 was expressed in semitones (ST) relative

to 1 Hz.

Estimation of VTL was made using the first four

formants (measured on the vocalic part of the readings), using

[24]’s equation and recommendations for formants estimation,

using Praat’s Burg algorithm [25] (i.e., estimating 6 formants

with a 5.5kHz frequency threshold).

Table 1: Proportion of Q1 answer categories and Reaction

Times (RT) by speaker category (CF, CM, TF).

CF

CM

TF

Perceived as Female (%)

99.6

0

47.6

Perceived as Male (%)

0.4

99.8

47.4

IDK (%)

0

0.2

5.0

Average RT (s)

3.4

3.7

6.2

Standard deviation RT (s)

4.1

4.3

5.8

From this perceptual evaluation, we defined a perceived

”Voice Femininity Percentage” (VFP) index, derived from Q1

answers, and defined as the number of Female answers plus half

of the IDK answers, divided by the total number of answers.

Figure 1 shows the mean RT for each speaker’s voice, accord-

ing to their VFP. While CM and CF speakers have VFP close to

0 and 100, TF VFPs are spread between 0 and 100. A second-

order polynomial gives a reasonable fit of the RT, as a function

of voice VFP, with a maximal RT centered around 50% VFP.

3.2. Gender perception test

A perception test was conducted using PsyToolkit [26, 27], an

online interface allowing the realization of in-browser exper-

iments.

A link to the online interface was sent to multiple

French-speaking research mailing lists and social media. 57

participants were enrolled in this perceptual evaluation. They

were asked to provide their gender (35 female, 20 male, 2 other

or confidential) and age range (18 in 18-35 years old, 25 in 36-

50, 9 in 51-65, 4 over 65, 1 confidential).

Participants had to read the instructions and to accept par-

ticipating in the study. Instructions described how this research

aims at investigating why and how voices are perceived as pro-

duced by females or males and that the participants were sup-

posed to evaluate how the voice they were about to listen to

could have been produced by a female or a male, of a given age.

Participants were not told that the voices might contain trans-

gender voices in order to avoid influencing their decisions. The

41 recordings were presented in a random order to each partic-

ipant, who had to answer two questions intuitively and rapidly

without having to listen to the whole speech sample. Partici-

pants had the possibility to answer ”I don’t know” (IDK). The

questions were Q1: What is the voice’s gender? (answers: Fe-

male, Male, IDK); and Q2: How old is the speaker? (answers:

20-35, 36-50, 51-65, over 65, IDK).

Q1 answer buttons appeared at the beginning of the stim-

ulus presentation. Participants had to answer Q1 to be able to

answer Q2. They were not able to replay stimuli nor change

their answers. Once the two answers were recorded, the next

stimulus was presented after a short pause. The evaluation took

about 6 minutes to complete, excluding the time required to read

the instructions and provide demographic data. The question re-

lated to speaker age (Q2) was aimed at distracting participants

to avoid a focus on gender. For each question, the answers and

the associated reaction times (RT) were recorded. The answers

related to the speaker’s age are not used in this study.

CF

CM

TF

Gender Categorization Reaction Time (s)

8

7

6

5

4

3

0

20

40

60

80

100

Voice Femininity Percentage (%)

Figure 1: By speaker plot of the mean VFP by average RT, with

a 2nd order polynomial fit predicting RT from VFP


## 4. Gender prediction models


The complete voice gender evaluation system is based on three

components that take as input a wav file sampled at 16 kHz. The

first step is based on the inaSpeechSegmenter Voice Ac-

tivity Detector used to discard non-speech segments [28]. Then,

a 2D CNN gender classification model is applied using a slid-

ing window. At each window step, it produces a binary gender

prediction that is averaged over the complete recording. Lastly,

an Isotonic regression calibration procedure [29, 30] transforms



this average score to the VFP obtained on the Trans- and cis-

gender corpus using a non-linear increasing mapping.

verification, diarization) [36].

VBX extractor is based on

a Resnet101 architecture pre-trained on Vox2 corpus, us-

ing 64-dimensional Mel filterbank coefficients to obtain 256-

dimensional X-vectors. This deep model (347 layers) has a rel-

atively large amount of parameters (45 M) since it was trained

for complex tasks. We build on top of this extractor several

Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), with a number of layers vary-

ing between 1 and 4 and the number of neurons per layer in set

{32, 64, 128, 256, 512}.

4.1. Binary speaker gender training corpora

Table 2 presents the 4 corpora used to train or evaluate bi-

nary gender classification models. Voxceleb 2 (Vox2) contains

celebrity voices obtained from Youtube in various recording

conditions [31].

Despite its size, it mostly features English

speakers, which may be sub-optimal for training gender detec-

tion systems targeting French voices. INA’s speaker dictionary

(INA1) and diachronic speaker corpus (INA2) contain voices of

celebrities obtained from French audiovisual archives [32, 33].

INA1 is based on speech broadcast on French TV news between

2007 and 2013. INA2 subset contains TV and radio speech

broadcast in 2015-2016, balanced across 4 age ranges (20-35,

36-50, 51-65, 65+) and 2 genders (female, male). The French

set of Common Voice corpus (CVFr) contains a large number

of anonymous volunteer speakers reading short sentences in

French and recorded using their own devices [34]. CVFr has

interesting properties with respect to our final use case, where

individuals may use variable-quality recording devices.

4.3. Training Strategy

We defined a DNN training strategy aimed at obtaining mod-

els with minimal gender, corpus, and speaker biases.

Male

speakers were randomly excluded from corpora so to obtain

balanced subsets containing the same amount of unique male

and female speakers. To mix training corpora, we discarded

speakers from the largest in order to obtain subsets with the

same amount of unique speakers per corpus. Speech record-

ings were then grouped by unique speaker identifier and split

into mutually exclusive training and development sets using ra-

tios of 80 and 20%, so a speaker from the train set is absent

from the dev set. For each epoch, a 1515 ms speech excerpt

was randomly drawn (position, recording condition) for each

speaker, resulting in a sample number equal to the number of

unique speakers, balanced across genders and corpora. Mod-

els were then trained using an early stopping procedure with

patience set at 50 epochs, monitoring the estimate defined as

the global loss plus the absolute value of the loss difference be-

tween male and female speakers obtained on the development

set. Each model was trained using 3 random initializations, and

objective function convergence was obtained within a maximal

amount of 160 epochs. 1500 TpCNN and 200 Xvector-based

models were trained using NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPUs, requiring

850 hours of computation time (30 minutes/model).

Table 2: Corpora used for training gender classification sys-

tems, described by number of unique female (#F) and male (#M)

speakers, duration in hours (Dur), main language (Lang) and

availability (Av)

Corpus

#F

#M

Dur

Lang

Av

Vox2 [31]

2311

3682

2460

English

Public

INA1 [32]

494

1790

123

French

Request

INA2 [33]

122

165

39

French

Request

CVFr [34]

758

3070

478

French

Public

4.2. 2D CNN speaker gender classification


## 5. Results


Two types of 2D CNN architectures were investigated for build-

ing the classification models. Both operate on Mel-scaled fil-

terbank coefficients obtained from 25 ms windows with a step

size of 10 ms. 2D CNN inputs are defined as patches of di-

mensions T*N, with N the number of Mel bands extracted from

each analysis window, and T = 150 being the time dimension

(the number of signal windows required to create an input patch,

corresponding to 1515 ms speech excerpts).

We defined Temporal Pooling CNN architectures (TpCnn)

inspired by [15] using N=24 Mel-scaled filter bank inputs.

These architectures are based on NCONV convolutional blocks,

a temporal pooling layer (<maxpool,T,1), NDENSE dense

layers, and a sigmoid activation.

Convolutional blocks are

composed of valid K1*K2 kernels with NFILT filters fol-

lowed by batch normalization and RELU activation.

Fre-

quency (<maxpool,1,2>), Time (<maxpool,2,1>), or

Time-frequency (<maxpool,2,2>) invariance pooling strat-

egy were inserted between convolutions blocks. Dense layers

contain NN neurons and have Dropout rates of 0.2. The param-

eter space of architectures was explored with NCONV varying

from 2 to 5, NDENSE varying from 0 to 4, NFILT and NN in

set {32, 64, 128, 256, 512}, K1 and K2 in set {3, 5, 7, 9} and

varying pooling strategies.

We also defined several X-vector based architectures us-

ing VBX open-source extractor [35].

X-vectors are 1-

dimensional speaker embeddings obtained with DNN archi-

tectures, generally used for speaker-related tasks (recognition,

Evaluations were realized in a cross-corpus configuration.

Vox2, INA1, and CVFr corpora were used to train ML models in

single and mixed corpus configurations (French=INA1+CvFr

and All=Vox2+INA1+CvFr). INA2 was used for testing mod-

els on the binary gender classification (BGC) task and to ob-

tain estimates of accuracy per gender and age category. The

Trans- and Cisgender voice Corpus (TCC) was used for testing

the Voice Femininity Percentage (VFP) prediction. Our pro-

posals are compared to 4 baselines: F0 and VTL corresponding

to median F0 or VTL, F0VTL is a linear SVM fit on median

F0 and VTL features, ISS is a gender classification model pro-

vided in the open-source project inaSpeechSegmenter and

pre-trained on French data [15]. These baselines were used in

pipelines, including VAD and isotonic calibration.

Table 3 presents the best VFP prediction models.

VFP


## results are reported separately for cis- (CIS) and transgender


(TF) speakers using the coefficient of determination (R2) ob-

served between model predictions and perceptual estimates.

Each model is associated with (i) a binary gender classification

(BGC) performance metrics described as the harmonic mean of

the accuracy obtained for male and female speakers (Hacc) and

(ii) a Gender Bias (GB) defined as the difference between the

accuracy for male minus for female speakers (GB > 0 if male

accuracy is higher than female accuracy, else < 0; GB close to

0 is better). While F0- and VTL-based models allowed obtain-

ing reasonable VFP results for cisgender speakers (R2 = 0.94),



their ability to predict transgender VFP is lower (R2 = 0.53),

illustrating the limitation of the F0 and VTL features for pre-

dicting transgender voices’ perceived femininity (or gender).

While showing better abilities to estimate TF VFP (R2 = 0.79),

the ISS baseline was associated with lower scores than our pro-

posals and a large gender bias (GB = +4.6).


## 6. Conclusion


We presented an original approach for estimating a continuous

ratio of perceived gender from voice, defined as a Voice Femi-

ninity Percentage, and fitted to the perceptual results of a group

of French speakers. This approach differs from [18], as we

have chosen to base our estimates on external listener judgments

rather than on speakers’ own judgments, as the former better

fits our aim: reflecting the gender perceived by the interlocu-

tors. Unlike [19, 20], we asked perceptual test participants to

provide binary gender judgments because gender is mostly per-

ceived as a binary characteristic in the French society (as shown

by the barely used IDK option) – but we considered the propor-

tion of female answers, that allowed us working on a continuous

dimension. While we considered this perception task more nat-

ural than asking for continuous gender judgments, it required a

significant group of participants; resulting in costly perceptual

gender estimations that we considered necessary with respect

to our final use case – having a model that reflects how a voice

would be perceived in a social interaction setting.

We implemented several machine learning models in

charge of reproducing these perceptual judgments and obtained

convincing results for cisgender (R2 > 0.99) and transgender

voices (R2 = 0.94), which were shown to be much more ac-

curate than predictions based on F0 and/or VTL estimates only.

Best results were obtained using VBX X-vector features (pre-

trained with English data) [35] with an MLP trained in a sin-

gle corpus configuration using CvFr [34]. This result suggests

that the best performances were linked to speaking style similar-

ity between CvFr and the evaluation material (non-professional

read speech) rather than to the training data language (no ma-

jor differences between INA1 and Vox2) or the sheer size of the


## dataset (CvFr is smaller than Vox2). Additional work would be


necessary to estimate the potential impact of training data lan-

guage if style is controlled for, using X-vector extractors trained

on French data. This result also suggests that the trained mod-

els that obtained fair but not the best results on our evaluation

task may be better suited to the analysis of spontaneous speech,

which was not represented in our evaluation material. Addi-

tional work is necessary to constitute a spontaneous speech cor-

pus using similar gender perceptual evaluation protocols. Other

factors, and typically the speaker’s age, had a major effect on all

models evaluation metrics, and typically gender bias: these re-

sults may reflect literature describing the evolution of voice with

age during adulthood [37, 38], with decreased F0 in female vs.

an increase for male. This illustrates the importance of models

fitted to the voice of speakers with varied characteristics.


## Results described in this study are currently limited to read


speech in French. Ongoing work consists in building Human-

Machine Interfaces to investigate if these theoretical results

match end-users expectations and allow to provide constructive

voice-passing feedback to be used in addition or instead of F0

estimates. Best performing BGC models presented in this study

have been integrated to inaSpeechSegmenter open-source

project [39]. Discussions with French regulatory authorities are

necessary to define how fitted calibration modules (BGC to VFP

mapping) could be disseminated while preventing non-ethical

uses related to the characterization of non-prototypical voices.

For all training set configurations, TpCNN obtained lower

scores than X-vector architectures. Reported TpCNN results are

limited to their best training set configuration using all avail-

able training data (TF VFP R2 = 0.86); their lowest results

were obtained while trained on CvFr (R2 = 0.76). X-vector

models obtained CIS VFP R2 > 0.99 for all training config-

urations, corresponding to almost perfect VFP estimation for

cisgender speakers. Best TF VFP was obtained with a model us-

ing four 512 neuron hidden layers on the top of the X-vector

extractor, trained in a single corpus configuration using CvFr

(R2 = 0.94).It was associated with the lowest reported BGC

gender bias (GB = 0.1) but also with the lowest BGC har-

monic accuracy (Hacc = 94.2). Best BGC results were ob-

tained with different settings: a single 512-neuron hidden layer

MLP trained with all the available data (Hacc = 98.1). This

best BGC-performing model resulted in a lower but fair TF VFP

prediction (R2 = 0.92). These two best-performing models

(TF VFP and BGC) were associated with BGC harmonic accu-

racy decreasing with the speaker’s age, as illustrated in table 4.

Table 3: Best VFP prediction models obtained. Hacc and GB

are the harmonic accuracy and the gender bias obtained on the

binary gender classification task. VFP R2 is reported for cis-

(CIS) and transgender (TF) speakers.

Model

Training

BGC

VFP R2

corpus

Hacc

GB

CIS

TF

F0

TCC

0.8923

0.4886

VTL

TCC

0.6961

0.0586

F0VTL

TCC

0.9407

0.5303

ISS

INA1

93.5

+4.6

0.985

0.792

TpCNN

All

94.8

+2.1

0.9978

0.8586

X-vector

Vox2

96.0

+5.8

0.9997

0.9181

INA1

97.3

+1.3

0.9995

0.9149

CvFr

94.2

+0.1

0.9987

0.9420

French

97.6

+2.4

0.9998

0.9147

All

98.1

+1.5

0.9997

0.9153

Table 4: Binary Gender Harmonic Accuracy (Hacc) and Gen-

der Bias (GB) described by gender and age categories of the

best binary gender classification model (X-vector All) and

the best VFP prediction model (X-vector CvFr)

Model

20-35

36-50

51-65

over 65

X-vector All

Hacc

99.3

98.6

98.2

96.0

GB

-1.0

-0.6

+3.1

+4.3


## 7. Acknowledgements


X-vector CvFr

Hacc

96.2

95.6

94.3

90.3

GB

-2.1

-3.2

+2.5

+2.7

This work has been partially funded by the French National

Research Agency (project Gender Equality Monitor - ANR-19-

CE38-0012).




## 8. References


[20] F. Chen, R. Togneri, M. Maybery, and D. W. Tan, “Acoustic char-

acterization and machine prediction of perceived masculinity and

femininity in adults,” Speech Communication, vol. 147, pp. 22–

40, 2023.

[21] R. Vaysse, C. Ast´esano, and J. Farinas, “Performance analysis of

various fundamental frequency estimation algorithms in the con-

text of pathological speech,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society

of America, vol. 152, no. 5, pp. 3091–3101, 2022.

[22] D. Talkin, “REAPER: Robust epoch and pitch estimator,” 2015.

[Online]. Available: https://github.com/google/REAPER

[23] L. Ardaillon and A. Roebel, “Fully-Convolutional Network for

Pitch Estimation of Speech Signals,” in Proc. Interspeech 2019,

2019, pp. 2005–2009.

[24] A. C. Lammert and S. S. Narayanan, “On short-time estimation of

vocal tract length from formant frequencies,” PLOS ONE, vol. 10,

no. 7, p. e0132193, Jul 2015.

[25] P. Boersma and D. Weenink, “Praat:

doing phonetics by

computer [computer program]. version 6.2.08,”

Feb 2022.

[Online]. Available: http://www.praat.org/

[26] G. Stoet, “PsyToolkit: A software package for programming psy-

chological experiments using linux,” Behavior Research Methods,

vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1096–1104, Nov. 2010.

[27] ——, “PsyToolkit,” Teaching of Psychology, vol. 44, no. 1, pp.

24–31, Nov. 2016.

[28] D. Doukhan, E. Lechapt, M. Evrard, and J. Carrive, “Ina’s mirex

2018 music and speech detection system,” Music Information Re-

trieval Evaluation eXchange (MIREX 2018), 2018.

[29] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,

O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg,

J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,

and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,”

Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830,

2011.

[30] N. Chakravarti, “Isotonic median regression: a linear program-

ming approach,” Mathematics of operations research, vol. 14,

no. 2, pp. 303–308, 1989.

[31] J. S. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman, “Voxceleb2: Deep

speaker recognition,” in INTERSPEECH, 2018.

[32] F. Salmon and F. Vallet, “An effortless way to create large-scale


## datasets for famous speakers.” in LREC, 2014, pp. 348–352.


[33] R. Uro, D. Doukhan, A. Rilliard, L. Larcher, A.-C. Adgharoua-

mane, M. Tahon, and A. Laurent, “A semi-automatic approach

to create large gender-and age-balanced speaker corpora: Useful-

ness of speaker diarization & identification,” in 13th Language

Resources and Evaluation Conference, 2022, pp. 3271–3280.

[34] R. Ardila, M. Branson, K. Davis, M. Henretty, M. Kohler,

J. Meyer, R. Morais, L. Saunders, F. M. Tyers, and G. Weber,

“Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus,” in

Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Language Resources and

Evaluation (LREC 2020), 2020, pp. 4211–4215.

[35] F. Landini, J. Profant, M. Diez, and L. Burget, “Bayesian hmm

clustering of x-vector sequences (vbx) in speaker diarization:

theory, implementation and analysis on standard tasks,” 2020.

[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.14952

[36] D. Snyder, D. Garcia-Romero, G. Sell, D. Povey, and S. Khudan-

pur, “X-vectors: Robust dnn embeddings for speaker recognition,”

in 2018 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and

signal processing (ICASSP).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 5329–5333.

[37] R. T. Sataloff, K. M. Kost, and S. E. Linville, Chapter 13. The

Effects of Age on the Voice, second edition ed.

San Diego, CA:

Plural Publishing, Inc, 2017, p. 221–240.

[38] A. Yamauchi, H. Yokonishi, H. Imagawa, K.-I. Sakakibara,

T. Nito, N. Tayama, and T. Yamasoba, “Quantitative analysis

of digital videokymography: A preliminary study on age- and

gender-related difference of vocal fold vibration in normal speak-

ers,” Journal of Voice, vol. 29, no. 1, p. 109–119, Jan 2015.

[39] D. Doukhan,

“inaSpeechSegmenter :

a cnn-based audio

segmentation toolkit,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://github.

com/ina-foss/inaSpeechSegmenter

[1] M. L. Gray and M. S. Courey, “Transgender voice and communi-

cation,” Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, vol. 52, no. 4,

pp. 713–722, 2019.

[2] C. Fugain, La pubert´e, la mue et la transidentit´e.

IsBergues:

Ortho Edition, 2019.

[3] J. G. Schmidt, B. N. G. d. Goulart, M. E. K. Y. Dorfman, G. Kuhl,

and L. M. Paniagua, “Voice challenge in transgender women:

trans women self-perception of voice handicap as compared to

gender perception of na¨ıve listeners,” Revista CEFAC, vol. 20, pp.

79–86, 2018.

[4] T. Murry and S. Singh, “Multidimensional analysis of male and

female voices,” The journal of the Acoustical society of America,

vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 1294–1300, 1980.

[5] J. M. Hillenbrand and M. J. Clark, “The role of f0 and formant fre-

quencies in distinguishing the voices of men and women,” Atten-

tion, Perception, & Psychophysics, vol. 71, pp. 1150–1166, 2009.

[6] J. Van Borsel, E. Van Eynde, G. De Cuypere, and K. Bonte, “Fem-

inine after cricothyroid approximation?” Journal of Voice, vol. 22,

no. 3, p. 379–384, May 2008.

[7] N. S. Mastronikolis, M. Remacle, M. Biagini, D. Kiagiadaki,

and G. Lawson, “Wendler glottoplasty: An effective pitch raising

surgery in male-to-female transsexuals,” Journal of Voice, vol. 27,

no. 4, p. 516–522, Jul 2013.

[8] VoxPop, LLC. EvaF : Voice training tools & lessons. [Online].

Available: https://www.evaf.app

[9] Speechtools Ltd. Christella VoiceUp :

Trans woman voice

training. [Online]. Available: http://www.christellaantoni.co.uk/

transgender-voice/voiceupapp

[10] R. van Bezooijen, “Sociocultural aspects of pitch differences be-

tween japanese and dutch women,” Language and Speech, vol. 38,

no. 3, p. 253–265, Jul 1995.

[11] D. Childers, K. Wu, K. Bae, and D. Hicks, “Automatic recognition

of gender by voice,” in ICASSP-88., International Conference on

Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1988, pp. 603–606.

[12] L. Lamel and J.-L. Gauvain, “A phone-based approach to non-

linguistic speech feature identification,” Computer Speech & Lan-

guage, vol. 9, no. 1, 1995.

[13] E. Parris and M. Carey, “Language independent gender identi-

fication,” in 1996 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,

Speech, and Signal Processing Conference Proceedings, vol. 2,

1996, pp. 685–688 vol. 2.

[14] M. Lebourdais, M. Tahon, A. Laurent, S. Meignier, and

A. Larcher, “Overlaps and gender analysis in the context of broad-

cast media,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources

and Evaluation Conference, 2022, pp. 3264–3270.

[15] D. Doukhan, J. Carrive, F. Vallet, A. Larcher, and S. Meignier,

“An open-source speaker gender detection framework for mon-

itoring gender equality,” in 2018 IEEE international conference

on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP).

IEEE,

2018, pp. 5214–5218.

[16] Y. Bensoussan, J. Pinto, M. Crowson, P. R. Walden, F. Rudzicz,

and M. Johns III, “Deep learning for voice gender identification:

proof-of-concept for gender-affirming voice care,” The Laryngo-

scope, vol. 131, no. 5, pp. E1611–E1615, 2021.

[17] G. Yasmin, A. K. Das, J. Nayak, S. Vimal, and S. Dutta, “A rough

set theory and deep learning-based predictive system for gender

recognition using audio speech,” Soft Computing, pp. 1–24, 2022.

[18] J. Williams and P. Paudel, “Application of deep feedforward

neural network in transgender vocal analysis,” St. Olaf College,

Northfield, Minnesota, U.S.A., Tech. Rep., 2022.

[19] F. Chen, R. Togneri, M. Maybery, and D. Tan, “An objective voice

gender scoring system and identification of the salient acoustic

measures.” in INTERSPEECH, 2020, pp. 1848–1852.