COARA WILL NOT SAVE SCIENCE FROM THE

TYRANNY OF ADMINISTRATIVE EVALUATION

Alberto Baccini

Dipartimento di Economia Politica e Statistica

Università degli Studi di Siena

Siena, Italy

alberto.baccini@unisi.it

arXiv:2408.05587v3  [cs.DL]  19 Apr 2025


## ABSTRACT


The Coalition for Advancing Research Assessment (CoARA) agreement is a cor-

nerstone in the ongoing efforts to reform research evaluation. CoARA advocates

for administrative evaluations of research that rely on peer review, supported by

responsible metrics, as beneficial for both science and society. Its principles can

be critically examined through the lens of Philip Kitcher’s concept of well-ordered

science in a democratic society. From Kitcher’s perspective, CoARA’s approach

faces two significant challenges: definitions of quality and impact are determined

by governments or evaluation institutions rather than emerging from broad public

deliberation, and a select group of scientists is empowered to assess research based

on these predefined criteria. This creates susceptibility to both the "tyranny of ex-

pertise" and the "tyranny of ignorance" that Kitcher cautions against. Achieving

Kitcher’s ideal would require limiting administrative evaluations to essential tasks,

such as researcher recruitment and project funding, while establishing procedures

grounded in principles of fairness.

Keywords CoARA, DORA, Leiden Manifesto, administrative evaluation of research, Philip Kitcher,

Tyranny of expertise, Tyranny of ignorance.



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

1


## Introduction


The agreement of the Coalition for Advancing Research Assessment (CoARA) is one of the key

documents of the contemporary discussion on the role of research evaluation in the organization of

science [CoARA, 2022]. It comes after the so-called Leiden Manifesto on Research Assessment

[Hicks et al., 2015], after the advocacy for the responsible use of metrics in evaluation [Wilsdon

et al., 2015], and more than ten years after DORA, the San Francisco Declaration on Research

Assessment [DORA, 2012]. All these documents, with others (for a syntesis see [Rushforth, 2025]),

can be considered as attempts by the “science reform movement” to respond to the long-lasting

crisis of contemporary science [Peterson and Panofsky, 2020].

All these documents are mainly focused on research evaluation technologies, i.e. on the

techniques used for realizing evaluation. CoARA promotes the widespread use of peer-review

technology supported by the responsible use of metrics, as defined in the Leiden manifesto [Hicks

et al., 2015, Wilsdon et al., 2015]. The use of peer review is instrumental in shifting the focus from

traditional metrics, such as publication counts and citation indices, to a broader appreciation of

diverse academic contributions, including teaching, leadership, openness, and societal impact. The

debate between reformers and advocates of metrics is ongoing. In the Netherlands, for example,

proponents of the Recognition and Rewards Program, considered the main ongoing experiment in

assessment reform, face opposition from professors who express concern about the potential risks,

especially for young scholars, arising from ’the abandonment of international evaluation criteria’

[Rushforth, 2025]. The tone of the debate is much more heated with regard to CoARA directly.

The primary criticisms come from advocates of scientometrics [Abramo, 2024], who even accuse

CoARA of ’scientometric denialism’ [Torres-Salinas et al., 2023]. Critics did not spare even the

narrative curriculum, one of the main instruments proposed by CoARA. It consists of a written

narrative that contextualizes a researcher’s contributions, explaining the quality, relevance, and

impact of their work in a broader sense—including teaching, leadership, open science, and societal

impact. Torres-Salinas et al. [2024] ridiculized the narrative curriculum by launching the idea of

“narrative bibliometrics”, and illustrating how to write a narrative bibliometric curriculum, by using

word to contextualize metrics .

Reform documents and the related discussions relegate crucial issues to an invisible background

such as the social desirability of evaluation, the costs and benefits associated with it, the institutional

context within which it develops, and the fairness of the procedures that characterize it. In particular,

they did not consider foundational questions such as the relations between research evaluation,

democracy, academic freedom, pluralism, and the soundness of science (see, among others, [Gillies,

2008, Collini, 2012, De Nicolao, 2022, Caso, 2022, Pievatolo, 2024a]

The question this paper asks is whether the generalized adoption of the CoARA principles could

surely make the evaluation of research desirable and solve all its problems [Gillies, 2008, Caso,

2022, Baccini et al., 2019]. The answer to this question is no. To reach this conclusion, three main

arguments are discussed. The first consists to define the notion of “administrative evaluation of

research” as distinct from the evaluation activities inherent in science. The second characterizes

CoARA as a form of ‘technocracy’ perfectly consistent with a utilitarian view of research. The third

consists in the adoption of an alternative view: Philip Kitcher’s idea of well-ordered science. It is

argued that administrative evaluation of research, even if correct according to CoARA principles, is

2



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

at odds with the principles of well-ordered science. These three arguments allow to suggest some

policy recipes, that in turn are at odds with current views about research evaluation.

2

Administrative evaluation of research

CoARA, the Leiden Manifesto, DORA are three key documents of the evaluation reform movement.

They are all concerned about the way in which research evaluation can be improved. But what kind

of evaluation do these documents talk about? They are talking about administrative evaluation of

research.

“Administrative evaluation” generically indicates evaluation “integrated as administrative routine

at many levels and in many types of institutions” [Dahler-Larsen, 2011, p. 2]. “Administrative

evaluation of research” refers to evaluation carried out by governments, academic institutions,

agencies, and other organizations to produce indicators or other evaluation information. As a

consequence, “the so-called research evaluation has fully entered into administrative activities

(selection, funding, etc.) and will eventually follow its rules. [...] Evaluation [adds] a stage to

administrative proceedings of various kinds in which the ultimate decision-maker is the judge”

[Cassese, 2013].

Indicators and information obtained from administrative research evaluation are typically re-

garded as the fundamental components of accountability for the use of taxpayer funds in research.

They also serve for evidence-based science policy and university governance [Whitley, 2007]:

they are instrumental in decisions regarding recruitment, promotions, and awards for individual

researchers, as well as for project funding and performance-based research funding (PBRF) systems

[Zacharewicz et al., 2018]. Molas-Gallart [2012] proposed to distinguish three main uses of the

administrative research evaluation: distributive, aimed at distributing resources according to the


## results of evaluation; improvement, aimed at individuating the best practice; and controlling, aimed


at scritinizing the use of public resurces. As a matter of fact “administrative evaluation of re-

search” encompasses massive research evaluation exercises such as the British Research Excellence

Framework (REF), the Italian evaluation of research quality (VQR) or the Australian Excellence

in Research (ERA); the performance based funding systems in the European nordic countries

[Aagaard et al., 2015], massive evaluations conducted at the individual level as in the case of the

Spanish “sexenio” [Marini, 2018] or the qualification for professorship (ASN) in Italy; evaluation

of projects for funding as in the European Research Council competition for ERC grant. Indeed,

research governance structures vary across countries, leading to diverse applications and uses of

administrative research evaluation.

The espression “administrative evaluation of research” instead of “research evaluation” allows

to carefully distinguish it from the evaluation that scientists continuously carried out during their

work. When a scientist reads a paper or a book and decides to recommend it for publication, or to

use it in their own research, they implicitly evaluate it as worthy of use because of its soundness,

originality, solidity, and other such qualities. When a scientific controversy arises, scientists evaluate

and discuss the reasons of the opponents; “Scientific debate can continue indefinitely in search of a


## conclusion that can no longer be refuted" [Pievatolo, 2024a, p. 6]. In contrast, in administrative


evaluation of research, “assessment authorities” give evaluators decision-making power that allows

3



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

them to decide when the debate should end and to impose their decisions “even on those who

disagree”[Pievatolo, 2024a, p. 6].

In recent decades, administrative evaluation has become a “taken-for-granted aspect of public

administration and organizational procedures for management and development”[Dahler-Larsen,

2011, p. 2]. Hence, the administrative evaluation of research has also begun to be considered an

inevitable aspect of research organization, despite the enormous variety of the ways in which it is

used in different countries. This is the result of the widespread adoption of a consequentialist or

utilitarian approach to administrative evaluation. In a nutshell, according to this vision, science has

goals to achieve. These goals are defined by political authorities, supranational policies, or experts,

perhaps after consultation with stakeholders. The scientific system is essentially designed as a

system for producing science. The only relevant feature of the scientific system is the efficiency of

production; hence, socially desirable scientific institutions are efficient institutions. The allocation

of resources to these institutions should aim to maximize the expected outcomes. Administrative

research evaluation is functional in enhancing the efficiency of research institutions; it allows

political authorities or governing bodies to gather information to steer research institutions at

distance. In particular, it allows one to properly allocate resources to the institutions that will be able

to make the best use of them. In turn, this mechanism generates a continuous push toward improving

research, enhancing the efficiency of the research system, and the growth of the scientific wealth

of nations [Whitley, 2007, Dahler-Larsen, 2011, Davis et al., 2012, Hammarfelt and Hallonsten,

2022]. This approach is fully defined inside a model that argues that the quality and efficiency of

science institutions are improved by introducing management techniques and practices that mimic

the functioning of the market. According to Bleiklie [2018], this model was the result of the recipes

of the new public management, and it can be labelled as “neoliberal” (see also [Lave et al., 2010,

Mirowski, 2011, Kulczycki, 2023]).

In fact, the idea that administrative evaluation of research can be taken-for-granted has found

much resistance among scientists, who have questioned not only its effectiveness (for a recent

overview see [Schweiger et al., 2024] and the bibliography cited therein), but also its legitimacy

and neutrality with respect to the goals of science (see, among others, [Gillies, 2008, Collini, 2012,

Taylor, 2022]).

3

CoARA and the promotion of evaluative technocracy

In March 2021 the European Commission (EC), Directorate for Research and Innovation, Unit

A.4 Open Science, started a consultation with “European and international stakeholders on how to

facilitate and speed up reform so that the quality, performance and impact of research and researchers

are assessed on the basis of more appropriate criteria and processes” [European Commission et al.,

2021, p. 3]. The EC considered that the current research assessment system "uses inappropriate and

narrow methods to assess the quality, performance and impact of research and researchers. Notably,

the quantity of publications in journals with high Journal Impact Factor and citations are currently

the dominant proxies for quality, performance and impact". Consultation results were synthesized in

a scoping report published in November 2021. It proposed the writing “of a European agreement that

would be signed by individual research funding organisations, research performing organisations

and national/regional assessment authorities and agencies, as well as by their associations, all

willing to reform the current research assessment system” [European Commission et al., 2021,

4



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

p. 3]. The text of the Agreement on Reforming Research Assessment (ARRA) was written from

February to July 2022. The writing of the ARRA was conducted by a drafting team of 12 people

from European Commission and Science Europe, a non-profit international organization gathering

forty national research funding organizations. A group of 19 “contributors” participated in the

writing through comments and suggestions [Arentoft et al., 2022]. The draft of ARRA was also

discussed in three assemblies involving organizations that had participated in the consultations for

the scoping report. Finally, the member states of the European Union were also consulted (for a

more detailed reconstruction of the whole process, see Di Donato [2024]). On 28 September 2022

the agreement was officially opened for signature and CoARA, the Coalition for the Advancement

of Research Assessment, was launched. CoARA is the “collective organization” in charge of putting

the ARRA principles and commitments into practice. The modalities of governance, operations

and funding of CoARA was drafted by “representatives from the European University Association,

Science Europe and the European Commission” with the advice of an implementation group

“made of representative” from ten organizations [CoARA, 2022]. On December 1st 2022 CoARA

was officially launched during a “Constitutive assembly” that adopted the governance document.

Actually, CoARA’s Secretariat is hosted by the European Science Foundation, a non-governmental,

internationally-oriented, non-profit association established in France in 1974. It coordinates also the

CoARA Boost Horizon Europe project, a project financed with 5 million Euros by the European

Commission [CoARA, 2023b].

The European Commission presented ARRA as “a co-creation process involving more than 350

organizations from 40 countries” [Commission, 2022]. In a recent European Union report the whole

process is summarized as “the [European] Commission facilitated a co-creation process to reach an

agreement on reforming research assessment” [Oancea, 2024, p. 13]. Matthias Koenig, one of the

current member of the steering board, even describes CoARA as “a science-driven, bottom-up and

inclusive coalition” [CoARA, 2025].

However, despite the appearance of broad consultation and stakeholder involvement, the key

orientations, procedures, and institutional architecture of CoARA were all designed and directed by

the European Commission, with the support of selected “representative organizations”. Notably,

even “representative organizations” and the stakeholders involved in the consultation were possibly

chosen by the very institutions responsible for drafting the agreement. The rationale on the basis

of which drafters, contributors, organisations and stakeholders are selected is not disclosed, nor

is the information on from whom they receive mandates, funding or reimbursement of expenses,

to whom they are accountable for decisions made [Pinto, 2023]. In sum, the text of ARRA, the

governance structure, and operational modalities of CoARA were predefined by a restricted group

of institutional actors “facilitated” by EC. Walter Rosenthal, the Vice president of the German

Rector’s Conference, stated syntetically that CoARA “is basically the result of a top-down process”

[Naujokaityt˙e, 2023].

As suggested in the scoping report, CoARA agreement is exclusively addressed to “research

funding organizations, research performing organizations, national/regional assessment authorities

and agencies” [CoARA, 2022, p.2 ]. Once an organization has signed the agreement or joined

CoARA as a member, signatory institutions and members of CoARA are granted operational

flexibility in how they implement the commitments undertaken: organization have to present an

action plan within a year of signing the agreement, and they “have full freedom in the develoment

5



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

of their Action Plan” [CoARA, 2023a]. At April 2025, 191 action plans are available in Zenodo

repository (https://coara.eu/agreement/action-plan/).

The responsibility for translating CoARA’s principles into concrete practices rests entirely with

the member institutions and organization. Indeed, CoARA does not directly engage with individual

researchers: for example, it does not require them to sign any form of ethical or deontological

commitment. Researchers’s contribution to reform consists only of supporting the dissemination

and promoting the adoption of COARA principles within their institutions. In this respect, CoARA

differs from DORA that is aimed at a broader target audience, including researchers who, by signing

its commitments, agree to act in a deontological manner, adopting specific behaviors in research

and when acting as evaluators [DORA, 2012, see recommendations 15-18].

The domain of CoARA is solely “research assessment”, the definition of which coincides

with that of administrative evaluation of research. According to CoARA, “research assessment”

encompasses “the assessment of research performing organizations and research units, by assessment

authorities, research funding and performing organizations; [...] The assessment of research projects

by assessment authorities, research funding and performing organizations, and prize awarding

organizations; [...] The assessment of individual researchers and research teams by research funding

and performing organizations and prize awarding organizations” [CoARA, 2022].

CoARA considers administrative evaluation of research as a taken-for-granted aspect of the

contemporary organization of science, by avoiding the discussion about its legitimacy and neutrality

with respect to the goal of science. More precisely, CoARA explicitly assumes that administrative

evaluation of research is desirable for science and society: “the assessment of research, researchers

and research organizations recognizes the diverse outputs, practices and activities that maximize the

quality and impact of research” [CoARA, 2022, p. 1]. CoARA contributes to the administrative

evaluation of research by simply adding that the adoption of evaluations techniques coherent with

the principles of the agreement is essential for efficiency, i.e. to “maximize the quality and impact

of research”. According to CoARA, “peer review is the most robust method known for assessing

quality and has the advantage that it is in the hands of the research community” [CoARA, 2022, p.

5].

Indeed, CoARA’s four core commitments concern the technologies to be adopted or avoided

for administrative evaluation. The first consists in the recognition in administrative evaluation of

the diverse outputs, practices, and activities that reflect the variety of contributions to science. The

second requires that administrative evaluation be based “on qualitative evaluation for which peer

review is central, supported by responsible use of quantitative indicators”. The third commitment

supports the abandonment of “inappropriate uses of journal- and publication-based metrics, in

particular inappropriate uses of Journal Impact Factor (JIF) and h-index”. The fourth commits the

signatories of the agreement to “avoid the use of rankings of research organizations in research

assessment” [CoARA, 2022, pp. 4-6].

The other six supporting commitments “include three commitments to enable the move towards

new research assessment criteria, tools and processes, and three commitments to facilitate mutual

learning, communicate progress and ensure that new approaches are evidence informed” [CoARA,

2022, p. 7].

6



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

It is worthwhile to note that CoARA, particularly its second and third commitments, does not

incorporate specific actions such as those proposed in DORA [DORA, 2012] or in the Leiden

Manifesto for research metrics [Hicks et al., 2015]. Both documents are explicitly referenced only

in Annex 4 of the Agreement, but the annexes “do not form an integral part of the Agreement” and

are “provided to support its implementation” [CoARA, 2022, p. 12]. Moreover, as noted above, the

Agreement grants signatories full discretion in selecting the tools and approaches to be adopted in

their action plans. As a result, these plans may diverge significantly from the specific principles

laid out in DORA and the Leiden Manifesto (see for instance [Pievatolo, 2024b]). This discretion

also extends to open science and open access, which are neither mandated nor operationalized in a

uniform or binding way. The definition of “openness” provided in the Agreement is rather narrow:

“openness corresponds to early knowledge and data sharing, as well as open collaboration including

societal engagement where appropriate” [CoARA, 2022, p. 3]. Signatories are only committed to

rewarding “research behaviour underpinning open science practices such as early knowledge and


## data sharing as well as open collaboration” [CoARA, 2022, p. 4]. In contrast, the broader and more


robust principles of the UNESCO recommendation on open science [UNESCO, 2021] are relegated

to Annex 4, while open access is mentioned only in Annex 1. Given this framework, it is perhaps

unsurprising that action plans might be developed with little or no attention to open science or open

access [Galimberti, 2024].

In general, the ten commitments adopt an ‘internalist’ or technological’ approach to administra-

tive evaluation of research and its reform. In a nutshell, the reform of the administrative evaluation

of research proposed by CoARA consists in a change of technology for evaluation. It is possible

to express this point with the metaphor of the thermometer. At least since Moed et al. [1985],

bibliometrics is represented as a thermometer, i.e. the (best) technology used for quantitative

research evaluation. CoARA proposes to replace this technology, the bibliometric thermometer,

with another one, the peer review, supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators.

CoARA implicitly argues that the definition of the most appropriate evaluation technique

can be developed independently of its institutional setting, of its procedures and of the incentive

system associated with the administrative evaluation of research. In essence, CoARA implicitly

assumes that the choice of evaluation techniques can be made without considering the research

policy framework in which the administrative evaluation of research is performed. In other words,

CoARA refers to very different evaluation contexts at the same time, such as the massive evaluation

of research in a PBRF system such as REF and VQR, or procedures for hiring a post-doctoral

researcher. The only contextual element explicitly considered by CoARA consists in acknowledging

that appropriate techniques must be adapted to the level of granularity of the evaluation (individuals,

groups and institutions).

CoARA lacks of a precise definition of “peer review” and a discussion of the many types of

“peer review” adopted in contemporary science. It appears that CoARA promotes the adoption of

qualitative evaluations by the peer community, regardless of the specific ways in which they are

performed. The replacement of metrics with peer review assumes, in fact, that when researchers

act as evaluators, they are, as scientists, naturally able to recognize research quality and impact.

CoARA admits that evaluators can be consciously or unconsciously biased on gender, ethnic origin,

and other, and encourages training evaluators to recognize and mitigate biases [CoARA, 2022,

p. 22]. It is implicit in CoARA that “unbiased” evaluators are committed to the good of science,

7



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

independently of the institutional and administrative framework in which the assessment is realized.

This appears hard to defend, as it asks scientists not to be self-interested. A more realistic way of

representing the behavior of scientists engaged in administrative evaluation consists in admitting

that they may act as “rational referees, who might not have any incentive to see high-quality work

other than their own” [Thurner and Hanel, 2011] or of their group or institution. This is all the

more true since the issues involved are mostly about money (e.g., hiring, promotions, funding).

Agent-based simulations on peer-review in journals show that the presence of a minority of rational

or selfish referees is sufficient to drastically lower the quality of the scientific standard [Thurner and

Hanel, 2011, Cabotà et al., 2013]. CoARA appears to hide or ignore such problems.

This replacement of technologies also assumes that there are no differences between the evalua-

tion of research carried out within an administrative process, such as the hiring of a researcher or

the national research evaluation, and the common evaluative practices adopted by scholarly commu-

nities to recognize scientific claims as provisionally true [Kitcher, 2011, Pievatolo, 2024a]. More

precisely, CoARA operates in the slippery landscape as defined by the argument that peer review “is

in the hands of the research community” [CoARA, 2022, p. 5]: the judgments of scientists involved

in the administrative evaluation of research are of the same nature or type as those produced in the

peer review processes of academic journals [Bornmann, 2011], and as those discussed by scientists

in public debates and controversies about science. In fact, all these evaluative practices use different

information, possibly adopt different standards, and happen in different contexts. COARA hides or

ignores such differences.

In summary, CoARA designs the efficient organization of research as an evaluative technocracy.

In fact, CoARA assumes that administrative evaluation of research is desirable for science and

society. The path to reforming the administrative evaluation of research requires that organizations,

authorities, and agencies in charge of it adopt the ten CoARA commitments. These commitments

are focused on the technology to be adopted in the administrative evaluation of research: peer review

supported by the responsible use of quantitative indicators. The adoption of peer review requires

that the evaluation be carried out by researchers whose judgments have administrative value and are

not subject to public discussion, but possibly only to legal challenge.

4

Philip Kitcher’s well-ordered science

In order to frame the role of administrative evaluation of research and of CoARA in the current

organization of science, I suggest to take seriously Philip Kitcher’s ideas of science in a democratic

society[Kitcher, 2011]. Kitcher adopted John Rawls’ theory of justice [Rawls, 1971] and developed

its application to the system of science. Just as Rawls outlines the characteristics of a well-ordered

democratic society, Kitcher defines an ideal system of science, which he labels “well-ordered

science”, compatible with the institutions of a Rawlsian democratic society.

Kitcher defines science as a public knowledge system in which researchers contribute new

discoveries. The public knowledge system is organized in four sequential processes: investigation,

submission, certification and transmission of knowledge, “elaborated in different ways in different

societies” [Kitcher, 2011]. Each process poses a series of questions that Kitcher aimed to respond by

avoiding both “pathologies of direct democratic control of science and an expert-driven technocracy

that separates science from society” [Ludwig and Ruphy, 2024].

8



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

For the investigation process, the main question is to define what “relevant” scientific inquiries

should be pursued in a democratic society. Who has the authority to decide what are the relevant

problems that science should deal with? In well-ordered science, the specification of “the problems

to be pursued would be endorsed by an ideal conversation, embodying all human points of view,

under conditions of mutual engagement”. Participants in this ideal conversation “are to have a wide

understanding of the various lines of research, what they might accomplish, how various findings

would affect others, how those others adjust their starting preferences, and the conversationalists are

dedicated to promoting the wishes other participants eventually form” [Kitcher, 2011]. It is easy to

recognize the similarity with individuals in “original position” participating to the definition of the

principles of justices in Rawls’ Theory of Justice [Rawls, 1971].

The introduction of the ideal discussion allows Kitcher to individuate two emerging dangers in

defining the relevant issues to be investigated. According to Kitcher, in the well-ordered science of

a democratic society, no one should have the authority to decide what the relevant issues are (for a

Kantian perspective see Pievatolo [2024a]). The relevant issues cannot be identified by a simple

majority voting procedure, because this could lead to the emergence of the “tyranny of ignorance”,

where myopic voters choose “in ignorance of the possibilities, and of the consequences for others,

completely absorbed in their own self-directed wishes". The second danger is the “tyranny of

unwarranted expertise” that occurs if researchers are given the right not only to do research, but

also to choose which topics should be investigated. Well-ordered science takes care to avoid these

two tyrannies in the definitions of relevant issues to be investigated.

According to Kitcher, the processes of submission and certification refer to the public discussion

to which the results of science are subjected. Submission poses the questions of “which people

are entitled to submit reports to the public depository. [...] How are they trained? What standards

do we expect them to meet in their investigations?” [Kitcher, 2011]. Certification is the process

through which new ideas are provisionally accepted or provisionally rejected as, respectively, valid

or invalid part of the public knowledge. Here, questions arise about what is required to accept

or reject proposals as part of the body of public knowledge. The usual submission of results to

“agencies of the public knowledge systems, typically journals and other vehicles of publication”, the

review process and the possible acceptance for publication are but the first phase of certification. It

may happen that after initial certification of a report, subsequent works lead to its correction or even

to its retraction. “ For a submission to be certified in the fullest sense, a community of inquirers

must count it as true enough and important enough” [Kitcher, 2011].

The certification procedure must also be subject to scrutiny by outsiders, a condition that Kitcher

calls ideal transparency. “A system of public knowledge is ideally transparent just in case all people,

outsiders as well as researchers, can recognize the methods, procedures and judgments used in

certification (whether they lead to acceptance or rejection of new submissions) and can accept those


## methods, procedures, and judgments” [Kitcher, 2011]. In sum, a well-ordered certification requires


an ideal deliberation consisting of a public discussion involving researchers and citizens. These

conditions guarantee that the public knowledge system is a collective undertaking endorsable by all,

storing sufficiently meaningful and truthful information.

Certification itself is subject to the two dangers of the tyranny of expertise and the tyranny

of ignorance. The first consists in the prevalence within scientific subcommunities of pervasive

ideological agendas or biases that drive members to favor particular hypotheses, overvalue certain

9



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

types of evidence, or fabricate evidence. Pervasive misjudgment, according to Kitcher, is particularly

relevant to the current erosion of scientific authority, in turn connected to the growing body of


## results based on manipulation and fraud insinuating into the accepted corpus of scientific findings.


Contemporary science is far from a generalized adoption of Mertonian norms [Merton, 1973].

Hence, both submission and acceptance procedures and replication alone do not suffice to detect

and deter fraud.

The overreaction to the tyranny of expertise led to the tyranny of ignorance. Kitcher refers

here to Paul Feyerabend’s call for “vulgar democracy” directly in the context of certification: “duly

elected committees of laymen” are called to deliberate by majority voting if scientific results are

really well established and should be considered part of the public knowledge worth passing in

textbooks for future generations [Feyerabend, 1975]. The “mob rule” defended by Feyerabend is

but a “vulgar surrogate” of the ideal deliberators of well-ordered certification.

Finally, the process of transmission involves questions about what parts of the public knowledge

are available to whom and whether the knowledge needed by different people is transmitted to

them. Serious shortcomings in access to information interfere, “possibly disastrously”, with the

functioning of democratic societies. These questions are intertwined with the functioning of

education in society.

5

Administrative evaluation of research and well-ordered science

Kitcher’s highly idealized model of public deliberation in well-ordered science has had limited

appeal to science governance scholars [Ludwig and Ruphy, 2024]. However, it brings to reflect on

the role and positioning of the administrative evaluation of research of individuals, projects, and

institutions. The question to answer what the role is of administrative evaluation of research in a

Kitcher-like logic.

To answer the question, one can start from the observation that in administrative procedures of

research evaluation, evaluators are academics with administrative authority. Consider, for example,

the evaluation of a research article in a massive research assessment. This evaluation is neither

the result of a well-ordered certification nor the result of a public discussion among peers. It is

instead the indisputable judgment of one or more scientists invested of the administrative authority

to act as evaluators. As highlighted by Pievatolo [2024a], the fact that evaluators are scientists

does not signify that they are ‘peer’ of the scientists being evaluated, since only the former have

administrative authority. The evaluated scientists can challenge the judgment they receive not

through reasoning in public debate but only through administrative or judicial action. In Italy,

for example, to challenge the judgment received in the national research assessment (VQR) or in

the procedures for the qualification (ASN), a researcher must resort to a court action before an

administrative court. In short, evaluators act as ’guardians of science’ for the policy makers who

have granted them the authority to evaluate.

Given this characterization, it can be argued that administrative evaluation of research does

not produce a Kitcher-like orderly certification, for two reasons. First, the research products to be

evaluated are already part of the body of provisionally accepted public knowledge and are therefore

already provisionally certified: discussion about them has taken place and is ongoing because they

are publications that, as such, are subject to the judgment of peers and the reading public. The

10



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

second reason is procedural: the outcome of the evaluation of individual research products is not

only not debatable, but not even normally made public. This formally excludes it from being a

certification.

Therefore, administrative evaluation of research can be properly characterized as a value-laden

post-certification administrative activity. The adjective “administrative” indicates that it takes places

under the umbrella of an organization, institution or agency vested with the power and responsibility

to manage and regulate the evaluation. The expression “value-laden” indicates that evaluation

happens according to criteria and standard defined directly by a ’government’ or by institutions,

agencies or individual researchers vested with the power of evaluation. The fact that these criteria

mimic those used in peer review of scholarly journals and that they are applied by academics

does not give the evaluation a Kitcher-like certification character. “Post-certification” indicates

that research products to be evaluated usually are already published and as such provisionally

certified. Moreover, as already highlighted, the authority of the evaluators ultimately derives from a

governmental act and not from participation in the public conversation underlying the certification.

Administrative evaluation of research is subject to both the tyranny of ignorance and the tyranny

of unwarranted expertise. To understand the point, a thought experiment can be proposed. Let us

try to imagine a government authority deciding to give the power to evaluate the research articles

produced by a university to a panel of individuals chosen at random from among the citizens.

Criteria to be adopted are “originality, significance and rigour”, as in the British REF. The panelists

decide the final score of each article by majority vote. This would be a manifestation of the tyranny

of ignorance, since lay people chosen at random from population are possibly unable to carefully

judge “originality, significance and rigour” of research articles.

Let us now imagine, alternatively, that the government authority chooses evaluators from among

academics, that judgments are based on “originality, significance and rigour”, and that the final score

of each article is computed by more or less complex procedures (average of evaluations, majority

vote or other). In this case, paraphrasing Kitcher, it is not difficult to think of the emergence of

the tyranny of unwarranted expertise: A particular ideological agenda, a pervasive bias, pushes

members of a scientific subcommunity vested with the authority to evaluate to overestimate the

quality and impact of certain products and to underestimate others even while fabricating the

necessary evidence. For instance, evidence exist showing that the tyranny of unwarranted expertise

was at work in British [Lee and Harley, 1998, Lee et al., 2013] and Italian [Baccini et al., 2020,

Baccini and De Nicolao, 2021, Baccini and Re, 2025] research assessments.

In sum, administrative evaluation of research is at odds with Kitcher’s well-ordered science for

two main reasons. First, the definitions of quality and impact used for evaluation are not the result

of a public discussion, but they are authoritatively stated by governments or institutions in charge

of the administrative evaluation of research. Second, governments or institutions give a group of

scientists the power to judge research based on these definitions.

The administrative evaluation of research has a major effect on the functioning of research

systems. Authoritarian definitions of quality and impact enter, more or less directly, in the design

of research policies and of incentives for scientists, through PBRF systems, through recruitment,

promotion, and career policies, or in the form of monetary rewards. In this way, they help to define

the preferences of scientists as to which problems to investigate, which methods to use, and through

which channels to disseminate research results. If scientists are toughts as rational individuals, they

11



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

will produce research outputs and implement “practices and activities that maximize the quality

and impact of research”, just as CoARA advocates. And the quality and impact of research being

maximized are not defined by the scholarly community, but by administrative authorities governing

the procedures of research evaluation.

It is not unreasonable to think that this also has feedback on the criteria that the scientific

community adopts for the certification of knowledge: quality and impact as defined by the authority

in charge of the administrative evaluation of research can, in this way, replace the certification criteria

previously constructed and adopted by the scientific communities. In this sense, administrative

evaluation of research contributes to distancing more and more actual science from the ideal of

well-ordered science.

6


## Discussion and conclusion


The application of Kitcher’s concept of well-ordered science in the context of a democratic society

allows for a clearer understanding of administrative research evaluation as an activity fundamentally

external to the domain of science itself. Rather than serving as a scientific certification process,

administrative evaluation functions as a mechanism for ascribing value to research outputs and

contributions based on criteria established by administrative or policy authorities. These criteria

are then implemented by scientists who, in this context, assume the role of administrative agents,

rather than autonomous members of a scientific community. As such, the very act of implementing

administrative evaluation shifts the practice of science away from Kitcher’s ideal of a well-ordered

science, in which research is shaped by an ideal collective deliberation informed by both epistemic

values and democratic input. In contrast, administrative evaluation imposes externally-defined

priorities and bureaucratic standards, subject both to tyranny of ignorance and to tyranny of expertise.

The research assessment reform movement, and CoARA in particular, originates from the

premise that administrative research evaluation is both necessary and inevitable. In the case of

CoARA, this foundational assumption is reflected not only in its stated objectives but also in

its institutional genesis. As discussed above, despite the appearance of broad consultation and

stakeholder engagement, the initiative was largely orchestrated by the European Commission,

with key orientations, procedures, and design features defined in advance by a limited group of

actors. This continuity is not incidental. Since the Lisbon Strategy of 2000, when the European

Union declared its ambition to become “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based

economy in the world”, a succession of policy frameworks, including Europe 2020 and the renewed

European Research Area (ERA), have institutionalized administrative research evaluation as a

central governance mechanism. Now that these strategies appear to have difficulties to deliver on

their transformative promises, CoARA can be understood as an effort to re-legitimize and adapt

the evaluative apparatus to new discourses around openness, transparency, and inclusivity, without

relinquishing its underlying logic.

The core problem CoARA seeks to address lies in the overreliance on quantitative metrics,

such as citation counts and journal impact factors, which has led to widespread goal displacement:

researchers optimize for what is measured rather than for what truly matters to scientific progress or

societal benefit. The reform agenda is grounded in the belief that by adopting more appropriate,

inclusive, and context-sensitive evaluative technologies is possible to realign research incentives

12



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

and foster outcomes that are both scientifically meaningful and socially desirable. According to

CoARA, the most promising technology consists of peer-review informed by the responsible use

of metrics, that can be readily adapted to the diverse contexts and purposes of different evaluation

procedures.

In turn, the notion that administrative research evaluation is necessary is also supported by

scholars who advocate for the use of carefully constructed bibliometric indicators [Abramo, 2024,

for all]. In this perspective, the defense of informed peer review and that of bibliometrics are, in

effect, two sides of the same coin. Both aim to enhance the administrative research evaluation, albeit

through different means. This debate about alternative evaluative technologies is deeply embedded

in a neo-liberal conception of science governance. Within this vision, research is organized and

managed as a productive system whose outputs must be continuously monitored, evaluated, and

optimized for “maximise the quality and impact of research” [Coalition for Advancing Research

Assessment (CoARA), 2022, p. 1].

The two alternative proposals fail to recognize the authoritarian nature of administrative research

evaluation as a structural problem within contemporary science. At its core, this model concentrates

evaluative authority in the hands of a limited group of scholars, who are thereby empowered to “put

an end to the free exchange of ideas and override the legitimate opinions” of other scientists [Kitcher,

2011]. CoARA’s commitments explicitly endorse the delegation of evaluative authority to selected

academics deemed capable of conducting peer review, supported by the “responsible” use of metrics.

Similarly, proponents of bibliometrics advocate for entrusting evaluation to expert bibliometricians

[Abramo, 2024]. In this latter case, the technocratic character of research assessment is not

only acknowledged but openly defended: evaluation must be governed by experts in quantitative

indicators. By contrast, CoARA obscures the authoritarian dimension of evaluation by framing it

within the language of peer review, cloaked in ideals of collegiality and responsibility. Yet, in both

cases, evaluative power remains exclusionary exposing research assessment to the risks of a tyranny

of expertise, the removal of legitimacy from dissenting scientific perspectives and reinforcement of

hierarchical control over what counts as valuable research.

From this perspective, the “forced battle between peer review and scientometric research

assessment” [Abramo, 2024] does not appear to be an intellectual battle. Rather, it appears as

a battle for the authority to evaluate, to occupy positions in government offices or agencies that

conduct administrative evaluation of research, and to sell well-paid evaluative services. In fact, the

growing space between policy makers and scientific system is progressively filled by academics

transformed in professionals of evaluation, by consultancy agencies and data providers [Jappe, 2020].

The winners n this battle over evaluation technologies will gain privileged access to the market

for expertise they claim to possess, mirroring the trajectory of the illiberal reformers described by

Leonard [2016]. They turned technocratic authority into a platform for political and economic power.

Leonard shows how, in the early 20th century, a new class of experts, economists, administrators,

and policy advisors, used the language of science and rationality to displace democratic deliberation

with technocratic control, often serving elite interests under the guise of neutrality.

The obvious objection to the reasoning so far is that Kitcher’s ideal conversation is only an

impractical idealization, since the organization of contemporary science institutions necessarily

requires administrative evaluation. The substitution of technology proposed by CoARA and the

recommendations contained in the Leiden Manifesto could therefore be considered as a realistic

13



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

and feasible proposals to reform administrative evaluation of research by shrinking or at least by

correcting the use of metrics.

The counter-objection begins by noting that the emergence of pervasive administrative research

evaluation is a relatively recent phenomenon [Sandström and Van den Besselaar, 2018]. Until the

1980s, national science systems operated without New Public Management mechanisms and without

systematic administrative evaluation, relying instead on diverse organizational models shaped by

specific historical and institutional contexts [Gillies, 2008, Gingras, 2016, Sandström and Van den

Besselaar, 2018, Whitley, 2007]. The exponential growth of contemporary science does not, in

itself, justify the necessity of these administrative tools. As many critics have argued [Gillies, 2008,

Collini, 2012], the problems that gave rise to the research assessment reform movement point not

so much to the need for better evaluative technologies, but to the need for a more fundamental

rethinking of the purpose, utility, and necessity of administrative research evaluation itself.

A possible option for research policy may be to abandon the precepts of new public management

and to return to limit the administrative evaluation of research to a bare minimum. This minimum

could consist in limiting the administrative evaluation of research to only those procedures strictly

necessary for the basic functioning of science: the recruitment of researchers and the funding

of project-based research. This means eliminating performance-based funding mechanisms for

research institutions, massive individual and aggregate evaluation procedures, and direct cash

incentives for publications and citations. The main advantage of this elimination is to greatly reduce

not only the risks of tyranny of expertise and ignorance associated with, but also the distortions in

scientists’ behavior induced by administrative evaluation of research.

Even in a scenario where administrative research evaluation is strictly limited, the use of

peer review, as proposed by CoARA, does not fully eliminate the risk of a tyranny of expertise.

When such evaluation is employed for purposes like researcher recruitment or project funding, the

central challenge becomes the design of fair procedures [Beersma and De Dreu, 2003, Baccini

and Re, 2025], aimed at minimizing the concentration of evaluative power and reducing the risk

of epistemic exclusion. Procedural fairness emphasizes the integrity of the evaluation process

itself, independently of its outcomes. It is a non-consequentialist notion: what makes a procedure

fair is not the distribution of rewards it produces or its effects on research quality, but its internal

characteristics, such as consistency, impartiality, and the inclusion of diverse perspectives and

interests of those affected by the evaluation [Leventhal, 1980].

Even when administrative research evaluation is narrowly applied, as suggested here, and

implemented through peer review, as proposed by CoARA, it still concentrates decision-making

power in the hands of a panel, that is, a specific group of scholars. To minimize the risks of a

tyranny of expertise, two conditions are crucial: ensuring fairness in the composition of evaluation

panels and carefully limiting their authority [Beersma and De Dreu, 2003, Baccini and Re, 2025].

For instance, selecting panel members should not rely solely on visible dimensions like gender or

institutional affiliation, but must also reflect the plurality of epistemic approaches within a field

[Baccini and Re, 2025]. In the allocation of research funding, fairness can also be enhanced by

incorporating elements of randomization to mitigate bias and reduce the discretionary power of

reviewers [Avin, 2018]. Gillies [2008] and others, for instance, have suggested, a two-stage process,

where experts identify a pool of meritorious projects, from which final selections are made at

random.

14



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

Ultimately, limiting the scope of administrative research evaluation and designing fair evalu-

ative procedures can help mitigate both the tyranny of expertise and the tyranny of ignorance in

contemporary science systems. This is a goal that CoARA, and, more broadly, any reform agenda

focused exclusively on improving evaluative technologies, cannot achieve on its own, unless it is

accompanied by a more fundamental rethinking of the role, purpose, and governance of research

evaluation itself.

15



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research


## References


K. Aagaard, C. Bloch, and J. W. Schneider. Impacts of performance-based research funding systems:

The case of the norwegian publication indicator. Research Evaluation, 24(2):106–117, 2015.

doi:10.1093/reseval/rvv003.

G. Abramo.

The forced battle between peer-review and scientometric research assessment:

Why the coara initiative is unsound.

Research Evaluation, 2024.

ISSN 0958-2029.

doi:10.1093/reseval/rvae021.

M. Arentoft, S. Berghmans, L. Borrell-Damian, S. Bottaro, J.-E. Faure, V. Gaillard, K. Glinos, J. L.

Albacete, R. Morais, J. Morris, M. Schiltz, and K. Stroobants. Agreement on reforming research

assessment, July 2022.

S. Avin. Policy considerations for random allocation of research funds. RT. A Journal on Research

Policy and Evaluation, 6(1), 2018. doi:10.13130/2282-5398/8626.

A. Baccini and G. De Nicolao.

Just an artifact? the concordance between peer review and

bibliometrics in economics and statistics in the italian research assessment exercise. Quantitative

Science Studies, pages 1–18, 2021. ISSN 2641-3337. doi:10.1162/qss_a_00172.

A. Baccini and C. Re. Is the panel fair? evaluating panel compositions through network analysis. the

case of research assessments in italy. Scientometrics, 2025. ISSN 1588-2861. doi:10.1007/s11192-

025-05255-9.

A. Baccini, G. De Nicolao, and E. Petrovich.

Citation gaming induced by bibliometric

evaluation:

A country-level comparative analysis.

PLOS ONE, 14(9):e0221212, 2019.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0221212.

A. Baccini, L. Barabesi, and G. De Nicolao. On the agreement between bibliometrics and peer

review: Evidence from the italian research assessment exercises. PLOS ONE, 15(11):e0242520,


## 2020. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0242520.


B. Beersma and C. K. De Dreu. Social motives in integrative negotiation: The mediating influence

of procedural fairness. Social Justice Research, 16(3):217–239, 2003.

I. Bleiklie. New Public Management or Neoliberalism, Higher Education, pages 1–6. Springer

Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2018. ISBN 978-94-017-9553-1. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9553-1_143-

1.

L. Bornmann. Scientific peer review. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 45(1):

197–245, 2011. ISSN 0066-4200. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/aris.2011.1440450112.

J. Cabotà, F. Grimaldo, and F. Squazzoni. When competition is pushed too hard. an agent-based

model of strategic behaviour of referees in peer review. In Proceedings-27th European Conference

on Modelling and Simulation, ECMS 2013, pages 881–887. European Council for Modelling and

Simulation, 2013.

R. Caso. The darkest hour: Private information control and the end of democratic science. In

I. De Gennaro, H. Hofmeister, and R. Lüfter, editors, Academic Freedom in the European Con-

text: Legal, Philosophical and Institutional Perspectives, pages 259–288. Springer International

Publishing, Cham, 2022. ISBN 978-3-030-86931-1. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-86931-1_11.

S. Cassese. L’anvur ha ucciso la valutazione, viva la valutazione! Il Mulino, 465(1):73–79, 2013.

doi:10.1402/44137.

16



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

CoARA.

The

agreement,

2022.

URL

https://coara.eu/agreement/

the-agreement-full-text/.

CoARA.

Reforming research assessment: The agreement is now open for signature, Sept.


## 2022. URL https://web.archive.org/web/20250130165903/https://coara.eu/news/


reforming-research-assessment-the-agreement-is-now-open-for-signature/.

CoARA. Action plans: Timeframe and useful resources, 2023a. URL https://web.archive.

org/web/20231106133248/https://coara.eu/agreement/action-plan/.

CoARA.

Coara

boost

project,

Nov.

2023b.

URL

https://web.archive.org/

web/20250310211050/https://coara.eu/coara-boost-cascade-funding/

coara-boost-project/.

CoARA. Coara steering board, 2025. URL https://web.archive.org/web/20250114154401/

https://coara.eu/coalition/steering-board/.

S. Collini. What are universities for? Penguin books, London, 2012. ISBN 978-1-846-14482-0.

E.

Commission.

Agreement

on

reforming

research

assessment:

now

open

for

signature,

Oct.

2022.

URL

https://web.archive.

org/web/20250129002119/https://research-and-innovation.

ec.europa.eu/news/all-research-and-innovation-news/

agreement-reforming-research-assessment-now-open-signature-2022-10-03_en.

P. Dahler-Larsen. The evaluation society. Stanford University Press, 2011. ISBN 0804778124.

K. Davis, A. Fisher, B. Kingsbury, and S. E. Merry. Governance by Indicators. Global Power

through Quantification and Rankings. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012.

G. De Nicolao. State-fostered immaturity? kant, galileo, and the grand evaluator. In I. De Gennaro,

H. Hofmeister, and R. Lüfter, editors, Academic Freedom in the European Context: Legal,

Philosophical and Institutional Perspectives, pages 333–349. Springer International Publishing,

Cham, 2022. ISBN 978-3-030-86931-1. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-86931-1_14.

F. Di Donato. What we talk about when we talk about research quality. a discussion on responsible

research assessment and open science. Bollettino telematico di filosofia politica, Mar. 2024.

doi:10.5281/zenodo.10890788.

DORA. San francisco declaration on research assessment. Technical report, DORA, 2012. URL

https://https://sfdora.org/.

D.-G. f. R. European Commission, Innovation, E. C. D.-G. for Research, and Innovation). Towards

a reform of the research assessment system: scoping report. European Commission, 2021.

P. Feyerabend. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. New Left Books,

London, 1975.

P. Galimberti. Italia e open science: le occasioni mancate. Bollettino Telematico di Filosofia Politica,


## 2024. doi:10.5281/zenodo.14505277.


D. Gillies. How Should Research be Organized. College Publication, London, 2008.

Y. Gingras. Bibliometrics and research evaluation: Uses and abuses. Mit Press, 2016. ISBN

0262337665.

17



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

B. Hammarfelt and O. Hallonsten.

Are evaluative bibliometrics neoliberal?

a histori-

cal and theoretical problematization.

Social Science Information, 61(4):414–438, 2022.

doi:10.1177/05390184231158195.

D. Hicks, P. Wouters, L. Waltman, S. de Rijcke, and I. Rafols. Bibliometrics: The leiden manifesto

for research metrics. Nature, 520(7548):429–431, 2015. ISSN 1476-4687. doi:10.1038/520429a.

A. Jappe.

Professional standards in bibliometric research evaluation?

a meta-evaluation

of european assessment practice 2005–2019.

PLOS ONE, 15(4):e0231735,

2020.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0231735.

P. Kitcher. Science in a Democratic Society. Prometheus books, Amherst, New York, 2011.

E. Kulczycki. The evaluation game: how publication metrics shape scholarly communication.

Cambridge University Press, 2023. ISBN 1009351176.

R. Lave, P. Mirowski, and S. Randalls. Introduction: Sts and neoliberal science, 2010.

F. S. Lee and S. Harley. Peer review, the research assessment exercise and the demise of non-

mainstream economics. Capital & Class, 22(3):23–51, 1998. doi:10.1177/030981689806600103.

F. S. Lee, X. Pham, and G. Gu. The uk research assessment exercise and the narrowing of

uk economics. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 37(4):693–717, 2013. ISSN 0309166X.

doi:10.1093/cje/bet031.

R. Leonard, Thomas. Illiberal reformers. Race, Eugenics & American Economics in the Progressive

Era. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 2016. ISBN 978-0-691-16959-0.

G. S. Leventhal. What should be done with equity theory? In K. J. Gergen, M. S. Greenberg, and

R. H. Willis, editors, Social Exchange: Advances in Theory and Research, pages 27–55. Springer

US, 1980. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-3087-5_2.

D. Ludwig and S. Ruphy. Scientific Pluralism. In E. N. Zalta and U. Nodelman, editors, The

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2024

edition, 2024.

G. Marini. Tools of individual evaluation and prestige recognition in spain: how sexenio ‘mints

the golden coin of authority’. European Journal of Higher Education, 8(2):201–214, 2018.

doi:10.1080/21568235.2018.1428649.

R. K. Merton. The normative structure of science (1942), pages 267–278. Chicago University Press,

Chiacago and London, 1973.

P. Mirowski. Science-mart: privatizing American science. Harvard University Press, 2011. ISBN

0674046463.

H. Moed, W. Burger, J. Frankfort, and A. Van Raan. The use of bibliometric data for the measurement

of university research performance. Research Policy, 14:131–149, 1985. doi:2132/10.1016/0048-

7333(85)90012-5.

J. Molas-Gallart. Research governance and the role of evaluation: A comparative study. American

Journal of Evaluation, 33(4):583–598, 2012. doi:10.1177/1098214012450938.

A. Naujokaityt˙e.

German universities still wary of eu push to reform research as-

sessment.

Science Business,

2023.

URL https://sciencebusiness.net/news/

german-universities-still-wary-eu-push-reform-research-assessment.

18



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

S. Oancea, Alis Wilson. Report on research assessment, 2024. URL https://doi.org/10.2848/

931335.

D. Peterson and A. Panofsky. Metascience as a scientific social movement. Minerva, 61:147–174,


## 2020. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:243390550.


M. C. Pievatolo. The Scale and the Sword: Science, State and Research Evaluation. Bollettino

telematico di filosofia politica, Jan. 2024a. doi:10.5281/zenodo.10452706.

M. C. Pievatolo. Taking all the running one can do, to keep in the same place: Anvur’s complicated

relationship with the coara agreement. AISA, 2024b. URL https://aisa.sp.unipi.it/

taking-all-the-running-one-can-do-to-keep-in-the-same-place-anvurs-complicated-relati

?utm_source=chatgpt.com.

V. Pinto.

La liberalizzazione della valutazione e la sotto/missione dell’Università,

pages

85–122.

Morlacchi

Editore,

Perugia,

2023.

ISBN

978-88-9392-435-1.

URL

https://www.morlacchilibri.com/universitypress/allegati/Santambrogio_

Valutazione%20fallita_interno_interattivo%20sito.pdf.

J. Rawls. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1971.

A. Rushforth. Research assessment reform as collective action problem: Contested framings of

research system transformation. Minerva, 2025. ISSN 1573-1871. doi:10.1007/s11024-025-

09573-3.

U. Sandström and P. Van den Besselaar.

Funding, evaluation, and the performance of na-

tional research systems.

Journal of Informetrics, 12(1):365–384, 2018.

ISSN 1751-1577.

doi:10.1016/j.joi.2018.01.007.

G. Schweiger, A. Barnett, P. van den Besselaar, L. Bornmann, A. De Block, J. P. A. Ioan-

nidis, U. Sandström, and S. Conix.

The costs of competition in distributing scarce re-

search funds. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(50):e2407644121, 2024.

doi:DOI:10.1073/pnas.2407644121.

J. S. Taylor. Markets with Limits: How the commodification of academia derails debate. Routledge,


## 2022. ISBN 1003251994.


S. Thurner and R. Hanel. Peer-review in a world with rational scientists: Toward selection of the

average. The European Physical Journal B, 84:707–711, 2011. ISSN 1434-6028.

D. Torres-Salinas, W. Arroyo-Machado, and N. Robinson-Garcia. Bibliometric denialism. Sciento-

metrics, 128(9):5357–5359, 2023. ISSN 1588-2861. doi:10.1007/s11192-023-04787-2.

D. Torres-Salinas, E. Orduña-Malea, Ángel Delgado-Vázquez, J. Gorraiz, and W. Arroyo-Machado.

Foundations of narrative bibliometrics. Journal of Informetrics, 18(3):101546, 2024. ISSN

1751-1577. doi:10.1016/j.joi.2024.101546.

UNESCO. Unesco recommendation on open science, 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.54677/

MNMH8546.

R. Whitley. Changing governance of the public sciences. In R. Whitley and J. Gläser, editors, The

Changing Governance of the Sciences: The Advent of Research Evaluation Systems, pages 3–27.

Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4020-6746-4. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-

6746-4_1.

19



CoARA and the tyranny of administrative evaluation of research

J. Wilsdon, L. Allen, E. Belfiore, P. Campbell, S. Curry, S. Hill, R. Jones, R. Kain, S. Kerridge,

M. Thelwall, J. Tinkler, I. Viney, P. Wouters, J. Hill, and B. Johnson. The metric tide: Report of

the independent review of the role of metrics in research assessment and management. Report,

HEFCE, July 2015 2015.

T. Zacharewicz, B. Lepori, E. Reale, and K. Jonkers. Performance-based research funding in eu

member states—a comparative assessment. Science and Public Policy, 46(1):105–115, 2018.

ISSN 0302-3427. doi:10.1093/scipol/scy041.

20