Exploring Citation Diversity in Scholarly Literature: An Entropy-Based

Approach

Suchismita Banerjee,1, 2, ∗Abhik Ghosh,2, † and Banasri Basu2, ‡

1S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Science, Kolkata 700106, India.

2Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 700108, India.

This study explores the citation diversity in scholarly literature, analyzing different patterns of

citations observed within different countries and academic disciplines. We examine citation distribu-

tions across top institutions within certain countries and find that the higher end of the distribution

follows a Power Law or Pareto Law pattern; the scaling exponent of the Pareto Law varies depending

on the number of top institutions included in the analysis. By adopting a novel entropy-based diver-

sity measure, our findings reveal that countries with both small and large economies tend to cluster

similarly in terms of citation diversity. The composition of countries within each group changes as

the number of top institutions considered in the analysis varies. Moreover, we analyze citation di-

versity among award-winning scientists across six scientific disciplines, finding significant variations.

We also explore the evolution of citation diversity over the past century across multiple fields. A

gender-based study in several disciplines confirms varying citation diversities among male and fe-

male scientists. Our innovative citation diversity measure stands out as a valuable tool for assessing

the unevenness of citation distributions, providing deeper insights that go beyond what traditional

citation counts alone can reveal. This comprehensive analysis enhances our understanding of global

scientific contributions and fosters a more equitable view of academic achievements.

arXiv:2409.02592v2  [physics.soc-ph]  2 Apr 2025

Keywords: Citation diversity; Diversity measure; Logarithmic norm entropy; Scholarly literature;

Award winners.

I.


## INTRODUCTION


Citations are the currency of academia, reflecting impacts and influences of research publications.

Ideally, a fair citation landscape would see recognition distributed proportionally to the quality and

contribution of research. The term ‘quality’ generally refers to the rigor, originality, and reliability of

the research, while ‘contribution of research’ refers to the significance or impact the research has within

and beyond academia on advancing knowledge, solving problems, or influencing a field of study. Both

factors play a crucial role in determining why certain papers receive high citation counts. Nevertheless,

citations are also influenced by external factors such as visibility, collaboration networks, and research

trends, rather than just intrinsic quality and contribution.

However, in practice, citations are often unevenly distributed, with a small number of papers receiv-

ing a disproportionately large share of citations, while the majority receive far fewer– a phenomenon

widely discussed as citation inequality [13, 15, 17, 37]. Measuring the inequality in citation patterns has

been a central focus of bibliometric studies, with many approaches borrowing from economic inequality

metrics [7, 9]. There are numerous studies [6, 10, 26, 30, 38, 39, 45] on citation inequality using various

inequality indices originally developed in economics (like Gini index), as well as entropy-based measures

(like Shannon entropy) [33, 36]. Moreover, indices like the Hirsch index (h-index) have been utilized to

summarize citation distributions [21, 24, 34, 49].

Citation diversity, on the other hand, measures the variety and evenness of the distribution of cita-

tions across different categories, which may be institutes, authors, disciplines, etc. [12, 35, 46]. Unlike

inequality, which focuses on how citations are numerically distributed, diversity captures the breadth

of influence a paper or institution has across multiple fields. High citation diversity indicates a wide-

ranging impact over various areas, while low diversity suggests influence being concentrated within a

narrow domain. It may be mentioned here that assessing diversity within a population is a crucial issue

across various applied sciences, such as ecology, biology, economics, sociology, physics, and management

sciences; see, e.g., [14, 29, 31, 32, 47]. However, the potential of generalized entropy measures, which

offer a versatile framework for assessing diversity, has not been fully explored in the context of citation

diversity. This gap presents an opportunity to use novel entropy measures for examining the breadth

and evenness of citation distribuhavetions.

∗Email: suchib.1993@gmail.com

† Email: abhik.ghosh@isical.ac.in

‡ Email: sribbasu1@gmail.com



2

This study introduces a two-parameter generalization of the Renyi entropy to measure citation diver-

sity, emphasizing the evenness of citations across different categories rather than focusing on citation

counts alone. The methodology builds on the concept of logarithmic norm entropy [19, 20], adapted from

information theory to quantify how evenly citations are spread within research domains, institutions, or

disciplines. Higher entropy reflects a broader and more uniform citation distribution, while lower en-

tropy indicates concentration within fewer categories. We apply this framework to explore variations in

citation diversity globally, beginning with top-ranked academic institutions across different countries to

explore potential geographical variations. Then, we extend our investigation to analyze the diversity of

citations received by publications of top award winning scientists (Nobel prize winners, Abel winners

and Turing award winners). This analysis will encompass various disciplines, ensuring a holistic under-

standing of citation patterns in research publications across different academic fields. We also explore

the time evolution of the citation diversity of the award winning scientists by analyzing the diversity of

recent and century old award winners across various disciplines. Finally, we dis-aggregate our findings

by gender, enabling a nuanced exploration of potential gender-based disparities in citation practices of

various academic disciplines. This entropy-based multifaceted approach on citation diversity offers a

detailed picture, havecapturing the subtlety and variations in citation distribution within the scientific

landscape.

This research facilitating an understanding of citation diversity in scholarly literature is presented

in a clear and logical structure.

In Section II, we outline data sources for citation information and

meticulously describe the data employed in the study. We provide details regarding the selection criteria

for the award winning scientists, the specific disciplines included, and the identification process for top

institutes across different countries. Section III serves as the foundation of our analysis, providing a

step-by-step analytical framework in developing the concept of general class of logarithmic norm entropy

and its use as a measure of citation diversity.

Section IV presents the findings of our investigation

where we delve into the analysis of citation diversity across various scenarios and the significance of our


## findings is also presented therein. Finally a concise summary of our key findings are provided in Section


V, describing the main takeaways from our analyses. Furthermore, we have also discussed the broader

implications of our research and potential avenues for future inquiry.

II.


## DATA DESCRIPTION


The ‘Ranking Web of Universities’ (also commonly known as the Webometrics) [1] is a comprehensive

academic ranking system established in 2004, which appears twice per year since 2006. This public

resource, developed by the Cybermetrics lab, encompasses over 31,000 higher education institutions or

universities (referred to as the HEIs) across more than 200 countries. Webometrics employs a mix of

webometric (all missions) and bibliometric (research mission) indicators to assess university performance,

promoting open access to scholarly knowledge. It provides the detailed citation data of the top HEIs

across the world through ‘Transparent Ranking: Top Universities by Citations in Top Google Scholar

profiles’ [2]. We used the January 2024 edition of this data (retrieved on April 1, 2024) for our citation


## analysis. The detailed data on citation counts of top institutes can be found in [1].


Moreover, our study also leverages data from ‘Scopus’ [3], an extensive bibliographic database of peer-

reviewed literature. We have used this resource for obtaining publication and citation information for

award-winning authors across various disciplines. This unified data source allows for robust comparisons

and minimizes potential biases arising from using disparate data sources. To ensure consistency, we obtain

total citation data for 21 scientists in each discipline from ‘Scopus’ [3] on May 23, 2024. Additionally,

we collect publication and citation data for individual scientists, including 30 Nobel laureates in physics,

chemistry, and physiology/medicine (split evenly between recent and century old awardees), 15 recent

Abel prize winners in mathematics, 15 recent Turing award winners in computer science, and 15 recent

Nobel laureates in economics from the same source [3] on May 23, 2024.

III.


## METHODOLOGY


A.

The General Class of logarithmic norm entropy (LNE) and diversity measure (D)

It was long known that potential families of entropy measures can be used as generalized diversity

measures [40]. Recently, the concept of logarithmic norm entropy (LNE) has been introduced in [18]

as a new measure for quantifying diversity, justified by its better statistical efficiency and robustness

properties compared to other existing classes of entropy based diversity measures. Building upon the



3

established concept of Shannon entropy [44] and Renyi entropy [42], the LNE offers a scale-invariant

generalization of the latter [19]. In this study, we leverage LNE to quantify citation diversity in scholarly

literature. This unique approach allows us to assess the robustness of our findings and gain a more

complete understanding of citation diversity patterns.

Consider a finite set of M categories (denoted as c1, ..., cM) representing different domains of appli-

cations, such as citation patterns across top institutes, the author’s own publications, gender-based dif-

ferences, and discipline-wise variations. The probability distribution over these categories is represented

as p = (p1, ..., pM), where pi signifies the probability associated with category ci for each i = 1, ..., M.

These probabilities are normalized to have the sum equal to one. The value of M, the number of cate-

gories, depends on the specific context of the analysis. The general classes of Shannon entropy and Renyi

entropy are defined [19], respectively, as:

H(S)

β

(p) = −

PM

i pβ

i log pi

P

i pβ

i

,

where β ∈R+,

(1)

"

(P

#

i pα+β−1

i

)

H(R)

(α,β)(p) =

1

1 −α log

,

where α, β ∈R+

(2)

i pβ

i )

(P

Clearly, at β = 1, Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) coincides with the classical Shannon entropy and the Renyi entropy,

respectively.

Several other one and two-parameter generalizations of the entropy functional have been introduced

in the literature, though their practical relevances and experimental validity vary. One notable example

is a generalization of Renyi entropy, known as the Kapur’s generalized entropy [27, 28] of order α and

type β, which is defined as:

"P

#

i pα

i

P

H(K)

(α,β)(p) =

1

β −α log

,

where α, β ∈R+

(3)

i pβ

i

In this case also, when β = 1, Eq. 3 coincides with the Renyi entropy. This is a two-parameter general-

ization of Renyi entropy but it is important to note that neither the Renyi nor the Kapur’s generalized

entropy measures are scale-invariant.

In this study, we consider the novel scale-invariant generalization of the Renyi entropy, namely the

LNE measure defined as [20]

"

(P

#

i pα

i )

1

α

H(LN)

(α,β)(p) =

αβ

β −α log

,

(4)

i pβ

i )

1

β

(P

where α, β are two positive constants (tuning parameters) leading to different entropy measures. At

β = 1 or α = 1, the LNE reduces to the Renyi entropy family and is generally symmetric in the choice

of (α, β). We readily note the limiting interrelations between these entropies as:

lim

α→1 H(R)

(α,1)(p) = lim

α→1 H(K)

(α,1)(p) = lim

α→1 H(LN)

(α,1) (p) = H(S)

1

(p) = −

X

i

pi log pi.

Clearly, the maximum value of the diversity measure (D) equal 100% for all members of the LNE

family regardless of the values of the tuning parameters (α, β). It always lies between 0 to 100 (both

inclusive) with higher values indicating greater diversity and vice versa. The citation diversity measure

(D), based on LNE, will be computed for each country and disciplinary group of prize winning scientists,

as well as for individual award winners, replacing p with its estimates bp derived from empirical data. We

will also compute these metrics separately among males and females scientists within the award winning

cohort.

Following (4) and noting that the maximum possible value of all these entropies is log M for a model

with M categories, one can define the general Diversity measure (expressed in percentage for convenience)

as:

D =

H(LN)

(α,β)(p)

log M

× 100%.

(5)

For computation of D in different such domains of applications, M takes different values. For example,

when analyzing top institutes, c1, c2, . . . , cM represents the set of institutes, and M is the number of



4

institutes considered within each country (i.e., M=10 while studying citation diversity among top 10

institutes, and so on) and the citation diversity, D, is then computed based on the citation data of these

M institutes for each country. The number of countries considered is dependent on the data availability

and hence it varies depending on the ranking level. For top 10 institutes, we could include 72 countries,

based on data availability, while for the study of top 20 institutes we could only use data from 55

countries, and similarly 25 countries for analyzing diversity among top 50 institutes.

B.

Asymptotic standard error and confidence interval

Since we are estimating the LNE based diversity measures from empirical data, we must additionally

quantify the extent of statistical errors associated with our estimates to draw more effective conclusions.

As proved in [20], such estimates of the diversity measure (D) will be √n-consistent and asymptotically

normal with the asymptotic variance being

σ2

(α,β)(p)

n(log M)2 , where

"

W2α−1

#

σ2

(α,β)(p) =

α2β2

W 2

β

−2Wα+β−1

W 2α

+ W2β−1

,

(β −α)2

WαWβ

with the notation Wc(p) = PM

i=1 pc

i for any c > 0. Note that, σ2

(α,β)(p) is symmetric in the choice of

(α, β), as intuitively expected from similar behavior of the LNE measure itself. Since σ2

(α,β)(p) varies

continuously in the citation distribution (p), we can reliably estimate it using our empirical data by

replacing p by its estimates bp. Finally, taking square root of the estimated asymptotic variances, we

get the (asymptotic) standard error (say s) of the estimated diversity measure (D), with lower values

indicating more reliable diversity estimates.

By utilizing the standard errors (s) of the estimated diversity (D) in all our cases, we have computed

and plotted the 95% confidence intervals for the diversity measures as given by (D−1.96s, D+1.96s). This

formula is obtained from the standard theory of statistical inference by utilizing the asymptotic normality

of the diversity estimate. Note that, the length of the confidence interval is directly proportional to the

standard error, and hence indicates the reliability of the estimated diversity; shorter the confidence

interval more reliable our estimates are. Moreover, such confidence intervals also help us to statistically

compare the diversity measures for two contexts (e.g., countries, subjects, or scientists); two diversity

values can be inferred to be significantly different at 5% level if the associated 95% confidence intervals do

not overlap. This gives us a simple visual way to identify contexts having statistically similar or dissimilar

diversities by just comparing the plots of their confidence intervals as presented in the following sections.

Throughout our entire analysis, we have used α = 2.0 and β = 0.5 in the definition of the LNE based

diversity. Although there exists a whole class of LNE measures with different choices of α and β tailored

to various applications, this specific combination is found to provide the most meaningful results for our

citation data, along with having lower standard errors and narrower confidence intervals; it was also

recommended in [20] from statistical considerations.

IV.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS


A.

Citation analysis among top institutes within different countries

There is an increasing interest in global university rankings through various metrics [5]. The rich and

exhaustive data of university rankings motivates one to analyse it from different angles and various

perspectives [11].

In the present investigation of citation diversity we consider the ranking of the

universities/ institutes, (NI), according to their total number of citations (Ncit).

This helps us in

examining the distribution pattern of total citations, across all disciplines, of top institutions of a country

as well as the citation diversity measure (D) among the top institutions of each country. This study helps

in delineating the geographical variation [22] of research activities.

1.

Distribution pattern of citation counts of worldwide top institutes

Initially, we examine the distribution pattern of total citation counts Ncit corresponding to a large

number of institutes/universities (NI) from various countries around the world. According to the We-

bomterics data [1], considered for the analysis, rank 1 institute is the Harvard University of USA with



5

citation count 27589889 and the Institute of Technology and Business of Czech Republic corresponds to

rank 5661 with citation count 1004. The data furnishing a wide range of variation in Ncit. The distribu-

tion pattern (Fig. 1) provides valuable insights in understanding how the citation data is spread out or

clustered around the world’s leading universities and institutes. Fig. 1a is the bar plot for the rank-size

distribution, based on the ranks of the institutes NI and the corresponding size of citation counts Ncit;

with an inset displaying the same plot in log-log scale for a clear understanding of the trend. Fig. 1b

depicts the frequency distribution curve of total citation counts across different institutions in log-log

scale. The distribution plot exhibits a power-law behavior in the higher citation end. The robustness

of the fitted power law is checked by a goodness-of-fit test yielding satisfactory Kolmogorov-Smirnov

distance (KS) and p-value for the fit.

(a) Bar plot of rank-size distribution, and its log-log

plot in the inset.

(b) Frequency distribution and the fitted power law

in log-log scale

FIG. 1: Rank-size and frequency distribution plots of the total citation counts with the corresponding

ranks of the institutes. The KS distance (KS), p-value and the exponent (ν) of the fitted power law

distribution is given in the inset of (b).

To proceed further, we consider the citation data of top 10, 20, and 50 institutes or universities from

each country across the globe. This data is found to be spread over 72, 55 and 25 countries, respectively

for top 10, 20 and 50 institutions. It is fascinating to note from Fig. 2 that the power law behaviour

holds for all these 3 separate cases as well. Each plot in Fig. 2 is accompanied with its respective KS

distance (KS) and p-value for the fit as well as the corresponding power law exponent (ν). However,

there is a variation in the value of the exponent with the change in the number of institutions considered

for the analysis. The adherence of the consistent pattern of power law in the higher end of the citation

counts [41] indicates a predictable relationship between the rank of an institution and its citation count

across different scales. Some recent studies have also demonstrated this power law trend in citation

analyses [4, 16, 23].

(a) Top 10 institutes

(b) Top 20 institutes

(c) Top 50 institutes

FIG. 2: The citation distribution for top 10, 20 and 50 institutes in log-log scale for various countries

across the world. Blue dots are the observed data points and red line represents the fitted power law

with varying exponents (ν), KS distance (KS) and the p-values in each sub-plot.



6

2.

Citation diversity in top institutes across the globe

Next we have studied the diversity in the distribution of the citations of the top institutes or universities

within each country. We employ the calculated D values, as previously explained in Section III, derived

from the total citation count across all disciplines for each country’s top 10, 20, and 50 institutions.

This approach allows us to classify the countries based on these diversity values (D) and also into 3

subgroups within each group based on high, medium and low citation counts (Nc). Tables I,II and III

provide detailed breakdown of these grouping, respectively, for the top 10, 20 and 50 institutions across

various nations; associated confidence intervals of the diversity measures are presented in Figs. 3,4 and 5,

respectively, along with box-plot visualizations of raw total citation data in each cases. Given the wide

range of Nc counts per country, we use a logarithmic scale for the y-axis in our box-plots (Figs. 3b,4b,5b)

to effectively capture and represent the distribution of citation counts within different countries.

In general, we have noted that some countries, despite having a high Nc count, do not necessarily have

high D values. Conversely, there are countries with lower Nc counts that exhibit very high D values.

Therefore, a combined analysis offers insights into both the overall diversity and the spread of citations

among top institutes/universities across various countries.

a.


## Results for top 10 institutions


In this analysis of top 10 institutes across various countries, we

examine 72 countries and divide them into six distinct groups (Group A - Group F) based on their

decreasing diversity values (D), with each group being closely homogeneous in terms of their values of

D. Each of these groups are again divided into 3 subgroups based on high, medium, and low citation

counts Nc for each country (see Table I). For example, Group A countries with very high D, can be

sub-grouped into A1, A2 and A3 group of countries with high, medium and low Nc counts respectively.

Notably, Fig. 3a highlights the remarkably small confidence interval for each country’s citation diversity,

signifying a high degree of certainty in our diversity estimates.

It is evident from the Nc count data of Table I that, within Group A, the USA stands out as the most

highly cited country when examining its top 10 institutions. However, our analysis reveals a different

leader in Group A, with Turkey emerging as the country with the highest citation diversity. In Group B,

while Switzerland emerges as the most frequently cited country, our study shows that Austria exhibits

the highest citation diversity within the group. This indicates that although Switzerland may dominate

in terms of citation volume, Austria’s citations are more evenly distributed among its top 10 institutes.

Conversely, Finland, despite being a part of the highly cited subgroup B1, registers the lowest citation

diversity in Group B, suggesting a more concentrated citation pattern. Meanwhile, in Group D, Belgium

stands out as the most frequently cited country, yet Norway surpasses it in citation diversity, indicating a

wider spread of citations across top Norwegian institutes/universities. In all other groups and subgroups

similar kind of results can be inferred. It is apparent that relying solely on total citation value or average

citation counts fails to adequately appreciate the impression of citation analysis; the citation diversity

measures are also required for a complete picture.



7

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

C1

Israel

1897026.00 86.68

USA

15258270.00 97.86

UK

8033507.00 95.74

Australia

5196256.00 98.23

Canada

5156112.00 97.53

Netherlands

3205991.00 98.76

Italy

3118657.00 98.79

Sweden

2823378.00 96.69

Germany

2718800.00 98.69

China

2607126.00 97.54

Spain

2117867.00 98.55

Japan

1924270.00 97.10

South Korea

1913191.00 94.94

Gr. A

France

1358776.00 98.65

countries

Portugal

880957.10 86.72

Saudi Arabia

732839.40 86.61

Gr. C

Hungary

396155.60 87.13

countries

Chile

383313.90 86.19

D ∈(85, 88)

Czechia

299917.30 87.42

Jordan

171519.80 84.74

Colombia

154868.40 87.20

C2

A1

C3

Palestine

35691.80 84.84

Cuba

16006.10 85.54

D1

Belgium

1819939.00 81.79

Gr. D

Norway

1149549.00 82.40

countries

D2

Mexico

627030.00 81.44

D ∈(80, 83)

Arab

314101.00 80.75

D3

Tunisia

8102.40 81.14

E1

Denmark

1631915.00 76.68

India

897276.80 98.98

D ∈(93, 99)

Iran

848094.30 95.97

Turkey

742169.30 99.33

Egypt

441066.70 97.98

Poland

438283.70 98.25

Indonesia

415959.30 99.25

Pakistan

287339.10 97.83

Nigeria

251443.80 97.02

Romania

244935.50 98.29

Ukraine

146194.00 97.59

Bangladesh

142648.90 94.38

E2

New Zealand

906472.50 75.22

Ireland

893135.80 76.82

Gr. E

A2

Kenya

93166.60 75.90

countries

Slovakia

92479.90 78.11

D ∈(75, 79)

Ethiopia

63702.60 78.83

Peru

62510.60 75.95

Bulgaria

51697.10 78.33

Libya

19220.90 74.52

F1

Hong Kong

1570705.00 72.12

E3

Morocco

98366.10 93.33

Algeria

75732.40 95.84

Uzbekistan

74695.20 99.10

Iraq

68101.10 96.40

Ecuador

43819.60 96.56

Argentina

394459.70 68.21

Gr. F

Serbia

170841.90 67.95

countries

Ghana

109620.90 72.45

D ∈(67, 73)

Croatia

105208.20 69.88

A3

F2

Switzerland

2883689.00 89.18

Brazil

1679322.00 89.64

Greece

1306760.00 88.41

Finland

1247269.00 88.27

Gr. B

Austria

1054539.00 91.61

countries

F3

Philippines

67549.00 70.09

Bosnia

34852.90 71.55

Outlier

Oman

69586.90 41.06

B1

South Africa

845386.70 90.00

D ∈(88, 92)

Taiwan

764616.10 89.57

Malaysia

729253.30 91.51

Thailand

259906.40 91.24

Vietnam

108368.90 90.21

B3

Sri Lanka

87499.50 88.61

B2

TABLE I: Categorization of countries (based on the top 10 institutes or universities) into groups and

sub-groups according to diversity values (D) and average citation count (Nc) per institute.



8

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count (in log-scale).

FIG. 3: (a) Citation diversity measure (red dot) for the top 10 institutes, along with their 95%

confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for each country 1, and (b) box-plot for the total citation of

top 10 institutes across the globe. The countries are arranged in the same order of increasing values of

D in both (a) and (b).

b.


## Results for top 20 institutes


By broadening our analysis to include the top 20 institutes, we have

been able to study 55 countries across the globe as per the availability of data. In this case, we observe

significant changes, compared to top 10 institutions, both in the diversity measure (D) and the average

citation count (Nc) for each country. Countries are again grouped as per their values of D and Nc as in

the case of top 10 institutes (Table II and Fig. 4). This expanded view makes the distinctions between

countries more apparent. For instance, Israel is initially ranked in Group C with high D and maximum

Nc within this group when considering the top 10 institutes. However, when the scope is broadened to

include the top 20 institutes, its performance metrics decline, moving it to Group E with a significantly

lower D value.

Similarly, Netherlands is categorized in Group C with lower D and Nc values when

examining the top 20 institutes, but rises to Group A with much higher D and Nc values when focusing

on the top 10 institutes. These results imply that, in Finland and Netherlands, institutes ranked within

11 to 20 have significantly diverse and have lower citation counts compared to the top 10 institutes there,

which were much more homogeneous in terms of citation counts. In contrast, while considering the top

10 institutes, Morocco is positioned in Group A with a much higher D and Nc values, but completely

drops out of the rankings when the scope is expanded to the top 20 institutes (as their is not many

institutes outside the top 10 list in Morocco to have sizable/reportable citation data).

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count (in

log-scale).

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

FIG. 4: (a) Citation diversity measure (red dot) for the top 20 institutes, along with their 95%

confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for each country and (b) box-plot for the total citation of top

20 institutes across the globe. The countries are arranged in the same order of increasing values of D in

both (a) and (b).

1 excluding Oman due to its significantly lower value compared to other countries



9

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

C1

Netherlands

1699040.00 83.82

Gr. C

USA

12105340.00 97.63

UK

5523985.00 93.92

Australia

3715297.00 96.24

Canada

3638187.00 95.51

Italy

2367446.00 97.54

Germany

2143908.00 97.98

China

1955727.00 96.63

Spain

1613509.00 97.44

Greece

743842.40 82.29

countries

Saudi Arabia

441429.00 83.99

D ∈(82, 84)

Chile

230567.20 83.22

C3

Colombia

91812.10 83.66

D1

Switzerland

1491331.00 76.01

C2

A1

Austria

569110.70 80.03

Gr. D

Portugal

480006.50 78.79

countries

South Africa

444548.00 78.19

D ∈(76, 81)

Mexico

372942.90 79.65

Hungary

208885.20 76.23

Czechia

162180.00 78.25

D3

Jordan

98843.60 80.62

France

993184.30 96.82

Gr. A

India

671044.80 97.36

countries

Iran

599467.90 94.36

D ∈(93, 99)

Turkey

594240.60 98.50

Poland

310970.30 95.89

Indonesia

307798.30 97.35

Egypt

300285.20 94.75

Pakistan

199903.00 95.42

Nigeria

183957.10 95.84

Romania

164146.60 94.27

Ukraine

104113.40 95.73

D2

A2

Israel

954046.30 70.07

Norway

606315.00 72.68

Gr. E

Arab

161761.90 69.81

countries

E1

Kenya

50018.80 70.45

D ∈(69, 74)

Ethiopia

34585.35 73.11

Peru

34206.85 71.77

Bulgaria

28378.05 73.60

Gr. F

F1

Argentina

206299.20 62.71

countries

F2

Ghana

56659.70 64.61

D ∈(62, 65)

Philippines

34953.20 62.96

E2

Algeria

54751.30 94.98

Uzbekistan

51147.85 95.67

Iraq

48109.00 94.70

A3

Sweden

1570605.00 86.28

South Korea

1205591.00 90.98

Japan

1181852.00 91.35

Brazil

1086417.00 88.35

Gr. B

B1

Malaysia

466856.50 89.32

countries

Taiwan

458992.30 85.50

D ∈(85, 92)

Thailand

159469.00 87.40

B2

Bangladesh

87134.20 89.57

Vietnam

68064.05 87.69

Ecuador

26947.45 91.23

B3

TABLE II: Categorization of countries (based on the top 20 institutes or universities) into groups and

sub-groups according to diversity values (D) and average citation count (Nc) per institute.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count (in

log-scale).

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

FIG. 5: (a) Citation diversity measure (red dot) for the top 50 institutes, along with their 95%

confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for each country and (b) box-plot for the total citation of top

50 institutes across the globe. The countries are arranged in the same order of increasing values of D in

both (a) and (b).

c.


## Results for top 50 institutes


When we focus on the citation data for top 50 institutes, we get data

only on 25 countries whose diversity values are calculated from their total citations (Table III and Fig. 5).

In the analysis, focusing on the top 50 institutions, Taiwan and Thailand fall into Group E, characterized

by lower D values. However, when considering only the top 20 institutions in these countries, they move

to Group B, which has comparatively higher D values. Conversely, Spain is placed in Group A with high

D and Nc values when considering the top 20 institutions, but it shifts to Group B with lower D and Nc

values when the top 50 institutions are considered. In Group C, Canada is grouped with South Korea,



10

Japan, and others, sharing similar D values but with significantly different Nc values when considering

the top 50 institutions. However, when focusing on the top 20 institutions, Canada moves to Group A,

while South Korea and Japan are in Group B, with different D values.

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

Group

Sub-Gr. Country

Nc

D

C1

Canada

1675403.00 85.43

Gr. C

C2

South Korea

581050.20 84.85

countries

Japan

562057.30 85.12

D ∈(84, 88)

C3

Uzbekistan

24379.08 87.26

Iraq

23362.16 87.47

Gr. D countries

D1

Brazil

501581.10 81.43

D ∈(81, 83)

D2

Egypt

132562.70 82.92

Gr. E

E1

Taiwan

200544.00 76.34

countries

Mexico

158899.30 70.76

D ∈(70, 78)

E2

Thailand

68940.40 77.37

USA

8666838.00 97.52

Italy

1431165.00 94.79

Gr. A

Germany 1303227.00 94.89

countries

China

1211080.00 94.82

D ∈(93, 98)

A1

India

402849.20 94.82

Turkey

378319.00 96.41

Indonesia

173539.30 93.51

A3

Ukraine

61362.62 93.61

B1

UK

3022509.00 90.76

A2

Spain

883924.30 91.84

Gr. B

France

539431.30 92.22

countries

Iran

309750.10 89.44

D ∈(89, 93)

Poland

164158.20 91.01

Pakistan

104250.40 90.43

B3

Nigeria

96024.60 90.45

B2

TABLE III: Categorization of countries (based on the top 50 institutes or universities) into groups and

sub-groups according to citation diversity values (D) and average citation count (Nc) per institute.

In conclusion, our citation diversity metric complements total citation counts by providing additional

insights that cannot be captured by citation counts alone. While total citations reflect overall research

output and impact, the diversity metric highlights the evenness of the distribution of citations across

different institutions, disciplines, and demographics. By considering both measures together, we gain

a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding of a nation’s research landscape. In particular, this

diversity index D ranges from 0 to 100 and can be interpreted as follows: a score of 100 would signify a

perfectly even distribution of citations, while a score near 0 would indicate a highly uneven distribution.

Therefore, for an example, Switzerland’s score of D = 89.18 suggests that while the distribution is quite

balanced, there is still some degree of unevenness which may be improved further (this unevenness is

indeed more compared to the countries in Group A having values of D > 93). The value of D are thus

used for a basis of comparisons between countries in Tables I,II and III, where countries in Group A have

the most evenly distributed citations, while Group B includes countries with slightly less even citation

distributions among their top institutes. The subsequent groups display progressively lower levels of

evenness as the diversity scores decrease. We observed significant variations in diversity depending on

different numbers of top institutes. For instance, Israel’s diversity decreased from 86.68% (Group C)

while considering top 10 institute to 70.07% (Group E) while considering top 20 institute; the country

is even dropped out of the top 50 list entirely, suggesting that the country has fewer than 50 renowned

institutes, and the top 10 institutes are more homogeneous in terms of citation counts than the top 20

institutes there. This highlights the crucial influence of a country’s concentration of high-performing

institutes on its overall diversity score. Moreover, we observe that while the UK exhibits very high total

citations across its top 10, 20, and 50 institutes, it is only classified in group A, characterized by a diversity

range of 93% to 99%, when considering its top 10 and 20 institutes. However, when the top 50 institutes

are taken into account, despite the high citation counts, the diversity value decreases, placing the UK in

group B, with a diversity range of 89% to 93%. This indicates that although the UK maintains a strong

citation performance, the citation diversity varies significantly with the number of institutes considered.

When focusing on a smaller number of top institutes, the UK demonstrates a broader citation diversity,

suggesting a wide-reaching influence of its most prominent research institutions. Conversely, India and

USA displayed remarkable consistency in its diversity across all three institute tiers, suggesting a more

balanced distribution of citations. However, expanding the scope to include more institutes reveals a drop

in diversity, implying a more concentrated citation pattern. This highlights the importance of considering

both citation count and diversity to fully understand the impact and reach of a country’s research output

across different academic institutions across the globe. Total citation counts often mask the underlying

distribution of citations, potentially misleading interpretations. By employing our novel metric, we gain a

clearer picture of how citations are distributed across a country’s top research institutions. Our approach

provides a more nuanced understanding of a nation’s research landscape by revealing the distribution of

citations amongst its leading institutions.



11

B.

Citation diversity in various scientific disciplines

Our citation diversity analysis in the previous section has been performed at the institutional level,

irrespective of individual scientists or any specific scientific discipline. We now shift our focus to study

the citation diversity in the publication data of various scientific disciplines. We specifically explore

the citation data of 126 internationally acclaimed elite researchers, in six important disciplines; physics,

chemistry, mathematics, computer science, economics and physiology/medicine, 21 from each discipline.

Additionally, to see whether the citation pattern in various scientific disciplines has changed over recent

times or not, we also explored the citation data of a total of 63 Nobel prize winners in physics, chemistry

and physiology/medicine.

1.

Award winning scientists in recent times

To develop a thorough understanding of citation diversity in different scientific disciplines, we im-

plement our methodology from three distinct viewpoints, namely total citations, total publications and

per-paper citation count. Table IV showcases the calculated D values and Nc counts per scientist for

every discipline and Fig. 6 depicts these diversity measures, along with their 95% confidence intervals,

and the distributions of individual numbers through their box-plots.

Total Citation Total Publication Per-paper Citation

Disciplines

Nc

D

Nc

D

Nc

D

Physics (2017-2023)

35982.52 93.91 364.71

92.73

121.00

95.41

Chemistry (2015-2023)

50636.52 93.38 366.90

92.65

153.70

97.14

Mathematics (2007-2023)

7117.48 89.89

89.62

90.80

82.48

94.63

Computer Science (2010-2023)

54503.90 74.22 228.95

89.06

236.53

84.47

Economics (2013-2023)

19426.90 93.97

92.10

95.85

240.22

94.47

Physiology/Medicine (2014-2023) 48794.19 93.52 330.57

91.77

165.82

96.20

TABLE IV: Average citation count (Nc) per scientist (considering 21 scientists in each discipline) and

diversity value (D) for total citation, total publication, and per-paper citation across six scientific

disciplines in recent times.

(a) D for total citation.

(b) D for total paper.

(c) D for per-paper citation.

(d) Box-plot of total citations.

(e) Box-plot of total papers.

(f) Box-plot of per-paper citation.

FIG. 6: (a),(b) and (c) represent the citation diversity measures (D) of recent award winners with red

dots, along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for each cases. Also (d),(e) and (f)

present the corresponding box-plots of the data.

It is noted that Nc count per scientist in mathematics is minimum whereas its D value is not so low. On

the other hand, the Nc count per scientist in computer science is maximum but its D value is the lowest.

So we can say that the total citation count of award winners in computer science is very high as compared



12

to the other disciplines, but the diversity of papers in computer science is relatively low compared to

other subjects.

This indicated that, in computer science some award winners have excessively high

number of papers and citations compared to some others. However, the number of papers and citation

counts seems to be much more homogeneous across all winners in the other disciplines than in computer

science. Additionally, the difference in paper and citation diversity among these other subjects is not as

significant as the difference observed between computer science and them.

2.

Award winning scientists in old times in three principal disciplines

We now extend our analysis to examine the citation diversity in the publication of century old Nobel

winning scientists in physics, chemistry and physiology/medicine. We employ the three aforementioned

viewpoints to calculate diversity percentage values for each discipline across historical periods (Table V).

Fig. 7 illustrates their citation diversity and count distributions (box-plots).

Total Citation Total Publication Per-paper Citation

Disciplines

Nc

D

Nc

D

Nc

D

Physics (1901-1921)

2270.81 50.27

37.24

86.63

46.55

68.47

Chemistry (1901-1927)

1159.67 70.83 131.76

84.02

9.50

77.91

Physiology/Medicine (1901-1931) 1979.43 60.39

63.10

81.70

19.30

81.27

TABLE V: Average citation count (Nc) per scientist (considering 21 scientists in each discipline) and

diversity value (D) for total citation, total publication, and per-paper citation across three disciplines

in past era.

(a) D for total citation.

(b) D for total publication.

(c) D for per-paper citation.

(d) Box-plot of total

citation.

(e) Box-plot of total papers.

(f) Box-plot of per-paper

citation.

FIG. 7: (a),(b) and (c) represent the diversity (D) of historical Nobel winners with red dots, along with

their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for each cases. Also (d), (e) and (f) present the

corresponding box-plots of the citation data.

It is evident that, in earlier period, the diversity values for physics were the lowest in both the total

citation and per-paper citation perspectives. However, in terms of the total publication perspective,

physics had the highest diversity value. This suggests that citation diversity in physics was significant

in previous times, whether considering the total citations or per-paper citations of award winners in this

discipline. Conversely, the number of papers in physics was more evenly distributed compared to the

other two subjects in historical time, as indicated by the higher diversity value for total publications.

Additionally, the average citation count for chemistry was the lowest in both total citation and per-paper

citation perspectives, while for the total publication, physics had the minimum average citation count.



13

This again demonstrates that to obtain an exhaustive understanding of citation analysis, it is essential

to look at the citation diversity values along with the citation counts of the publication data.

3.

Comparing citation diversity between recent and old times award winners in three principal disciplines

We now compare the citation diversity values across three principal disciplines between recent and old

times. Table VI shows the D values for both recent and past times from 3 different viewpoints. Fig. 8

clearly illustrates a significant increase in D in recent times for all three disciplines in all cases.

D in Recent times

D in Old times

per-paper

citation

Physics

93.91

92.73

95.41

50.27

86.63

68.47

Chemistry

93.38

92.65

97.14

70.83

84.02

77.91

Physiology/Medicine

93.52

91.77

96.20

60.39

81.70

81.27

per-paper

citation

total

publication

total

publication

Disciplines

total

citation

total

citation

TABLE VI: Comparison of diversity measure (D) of three principal disciplines in recent and old times.

(a) Total citation.

(b) Total publication.

(c) Per-paper citation.

FIG. 8: Visual representation of the comparison of diversity (D) among award winning scientists across

three principal disciplines for all three perspectives. Here red dots represent the diversity measure of

each award winners in recent times and dark blue dots are the same for previous times, along with

their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines), for the both cases.

From this comparison, we can see that diversity values have increased across all disciplines from past

eras to recent times. Notably, the recent era shows very small differences in diversity values among the

three disciplines, highlighting a more even distribution of total number of citations, total number of

papers, and per-paper citations among award winners across all disciplines. In contrast, these differences

were much larger in the past. Additionally, we observe that while physics had the lowest diversity for

the total citation in earlier times, it now has the highest D value compared to the other two disciplines

in recent times, suggesting a significant improvement in the equality of citation distribution for physics.

Again Fig. 8 reveals that the confidence interval for the total citation perspective is minimal, whereas the

confidence intervals for the total publication and per-paper citation are comparatively large in both the

recent and past eras. Thus, we can infer that the diversity estimate for the total citation is more reliable

compared to the other two perspectives. Overall, this comparison reveals that the citation distribution

in physics has improved markedly in recent times compared to previous times.

C.

Citation diversity in the publication of Individual prize winning scientists

We now aspire to inspect the citation diversity in the publications of the individual prize winning

scientists across various scientific disciplines. We have chosen the citation data for a total of 135 eminent

scholars from the aforesaid scientific disciplines. In particular, we have considered the Nobel prize winners

in physics (30), chemistry (30), physiology/medicine (30) and economics (15), Abel prize winners in

mathematics (15) and Turing award winners in computer science (15).



14

1.

The Nobel Prize winners in Physics

The Nobel prize in physics has been awarded to 224 individuals between 1901 and 2023. For our

investigation we have explored the citation counts of 30 Nobel laureates in physics, 15 from recent

times (2019-2023) and 15 from the period (1901-1915).

Using this data, we calculated the citation

diversity values in the publication of these scientists following the methodology outlined above in Section

III. Table VII provides the citation diversity (D) values for each scientist considered along with their

average citation counts (Nc). Fig. 9 illustrates the citation diversity values for each recent laureate, with

Fig. 9a specifically highlighting the citation diversity of recent laureates. Notably, the confidence intervals

for each point are very small, confirming the accuracy of these values. Additionally, Fig. 9b presents

a box-plot of the citation counts of the laureates from raw citation data of their publications.

The

citation diversity values for the 15 recent laureates range from about 60% to 90%, with higher diversity

correlating with lower average citation counts, underscoring the limitations of using average citations

alone to represent a laureate’s citation distribution. In Fig. 10, we observe the citation diversity values

of earlier Nobel laureates, with Fig. 10a revealing a wide range of citation diversity from 20% to 80%.

Larger confidence intervals further extend this range. Fig. 10b shows a box-plot based on their raw

citation data, revealing that earlier laureates generally had lower citation counts but higher diversity

values. Overall, the increase in estimated diversity values from earlier to more recent laureates suggests

a decline in citation diversity among Nobel laureates in physics over the years.

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

Phys1 (2023)

105.72 77.83

Phys2 (2023)

112.46 79.88

Phys3 (2023)

95.74 79.49

Phys4 (2022)

102.42 76.70

Phys5 (2022)

314.39 58.92

Phys6 (2022)

150.22 82.08

Phys7 (2021)

138.68 87.46

Phys8 (2021)

128.70 79.32

Phys9 (2021)

79.60 80.02

Phys10 (2020)

171.86 77.10

Phys11 (2020)

101.63 88.94

Phys12 (2020)

66.37 84.61

Phys13 (2019)

129.35 65.91

Phys14 (2019)

97.12 86.55

Phys15 (2019)

73.71 85.07

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

PhysO1 (1901)

19.42 69.21

PhysO2 (1902)

86.19 49.77

PhysO3 (1902)

3.17 75.90

PhysO4 (1904)

477.40 62.97

PhysO5 (1905)

11.84 77.17

PhysO6 (1906)

5.75 68.77

PhysO7 (1907)

13.50 67.09

PhysO8 (1908)

43.50 37.51

PhysO9 (1909)

8.70 77.11

PhysO10 (1909)

7.00 74.56

PhysO11 (1912)

40.85 90.01

PhysO12 (1913)

3.33 87.38

PhysO13 (1914)

6.79 78.61

PhysO14 (1915)

13.58 80.42

PhysO15 (1915)

13.43 78.39

TABLE VII: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity (D) of 15 Nobel

laureates during (2019-2023) and 15 laureates during (1901-1915) in physics.

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 9: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of recent Nobel laureates during (2019-2023) in physics, along

with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for the citation counts of each

of them.



15

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 10: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of earlier Nobel laureates during (1901-1915) in physics,

along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for citation counts of

each of them.

2.

Nobel Prize winners in Chemistry

From 1901 to 2023 the Nobel prize in chemistry has been bestowed on a total of 192 individuals. For

our analysis, we have picked up the citation data of 30 Nobel prize winners in chemistry, 15 during

1901-1920 and 15 between 2018-2023. Table VIII represents the calculated diversity values and average

citation counts of all the listed Nobel prize winners in chemistry. In Fig. 11, we see the citation diversity

of 15 recent Nobel laureates in chemistry, with diversity values ranging from 60% to 90%. Two distinct

groups emerge: one containing four laureates with citation diversity between 60%-70%, indicating lower

citation diversity, and another between 80%-90%, reflecting a more balanced citation distribution. The

minimal confidence intervals confirm the reliability of these values. Fig. 11b further shows that despite

similar average citation counts, diversity values differ significantly, revealing more insightful patterns in

citation distribution. Meanwhile, Fig. 12 shows earlier laureates’ citation diversity ranging from 65% to

90%, though with larger confidence intervals, indicating greater variability.

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

Chem1 (2023)

252.39 83.08

Chem2 (2023)

245.78 84.04

Chem3 (2022)

123.02 86.09

Chem4 (2022)

84.05 68.28

Chem5 (2022)

246.29 80.23

Chem6 (2021)

141.49 86.24

Chem7 (2021)

278.57 86.46

Chem8 (2020)

343.90 65.34

Chem9 (2020)

216.42 81.47

Chem10 (2020)

149.54 81.26

Chem11 (2019)

100.96 78.22

Chem12 (2019)

97.19 62.76

Chem13 (2018)

116.60 90.24

Chem14 (2018)

211.82 69.12

Chem15 (2018)

182.06 86.16

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

ChemO1 (1901)

5.00 83.74

ChemO2 (1902)

20.07 73.72

ChemO3 (1903)

6.20 81.61

ChemO4 (1904)

3.57 88.26

ChemO5 (1906)

1.67 89.86

ChemO6 (1907)

8.65 75.06

ChemO7 (1908)

7.38 82.60

ChemO8 (1909)

12.33 80.10

ChemO9 (1910)

6.52 82.76

ChemO10 (1912)

2.25 89.45

ChemO11 (1913) 15.81 81.52

ChemO12 (1914)

5.05 85.77

ChemO13 (1915)

9.00 87.01

ChemO14 (1918) 19.61 65.01

ChemO15 (1920) 15.75 79.29

TABLE VIII: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity values (D) of 30 Nobel

laureates in chemistry, with 15 during the period (2018-2023) and 15 during the period (1901-1920).

3.

Abel prize winners in Mathematics

The Abel prize is awarded annually (2003 onwards) to one or more outstanding mathematicians and is

widely considered the Nobel prize of mathematics. Here we consider the data for 15 Able prize winners

during 2012-2023. Table IX presents the average citation counts and diversity values for each Abel prize

winner considered. In Fig. 13, we observe the citation diversity and box-plot for the citation counts

of each Abel prize winner. These citation diversity values of each scientist range from 70% to 90%,

indicating moderate citation diversity. The confidence intervals for most diversity values are not high,

though a few have slightly higher confidence intervals. This suggests that most calculated diversity values



16

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 11: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of recent Nobel laureates during (2018-2023) in chemistry,

along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for citation counts of

each of them.

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 12: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of old Nobel laureates during (1901-1920) in chemistry, along

with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for the citation counts of each

of them.

are reliable, with some variability due to the use of publicly available data.

Abel Prize Winners

Nc

D

Maths1 (2023)

86.14 82.88

Maths2 (2022)

81.47 81.05

Maths3 (2021)

84.41 78.37

Maths4 (2021)

71.79 77.98

Maths5 (2020)

99.16 77.04

Maths6 (2020)

43.90 88.97

Maths7 (2019)

109.15 80.80

Maths8 (2018)

43.69 79.14

Abel Prize Winners

Nc

D

Maths9 (2017)

75.45 71.88

Maths10 (2016)

76.58 74.85

Maths11 (2015)

21.20 72.09

Maths12 (2015)

289.14 82.17

Maths13 (2014)

58.38 82.20

Maths14 (2013)

187.70 78.34

Maths15 (2012)

56.92 86.29

TABLE IX: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity (D) of 15 Abel prize

winners during 2012 to 2023 in mathematics.

In this case, we observe that one of the 2015 Abel Prize winners has the highest Nc value but a lower

D value. Conversely, one of the 2020 Abel Prize winners has a comparatively lower Nc but the highest

D value. It is also noteworthy that, despite having similar Nc values (with the exception of three cases),

their D values vary significantly, ranging from 71% to 89%.

4.

Turing Award winners in Computer Science

The ACM A. M. Turing Award is an annual prize given by the Association for Computing Machinery

(ACM) for contributions of lasting and major technical importance to computer science. Commencing in

1966, as of 2024, 77 people have been awarded the prize. We settled on the publication data of 15 highly

recognized computer scientists between 2015-2023 only. Table X presents the calculated diversity values

along with the average citation counts for each Turing prize winner. In Fig. 14, we present an overview

of the diversity values and citation ranges for each Turing award winner in computer science. scientists

Notably, the diversity value of one of the 2015 Turing award winners is significantly lower compared



17

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 13: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of Able prize winners during (2012-2023) in mathematics,

along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for the citation counts of

each of them.

Turing Prize Winners

Nc

D

CS 1 (2023)

71.79 77.98

CS 2 (2022)

139.33 53.93

CS 3 (2021)

34.93 84.51

CS 4 (2020)

80.23 80.22

CS 5 (2020)

81.14 70.10

CS 6 (2019)

92.73 80.18

CS 7 (2019)

174.11 65.04

CS 8 (2018)

603.73 65.10

Turing Prize Winners

Nc

D

CS 9 (2018)

1365.96 62.76

CS 10 (2018)

683.66 59.70

CS 11 (2017)

54.85 83.33

CS 12 (2017)

88.96 75.01

CS 13 (2016)

362.10 54.41

CS 14 (2015)

411.17 36.75

CS 15 (2015)

349.94 52.96

TABLE X: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity (D) of 15 Turing Prize

winners during 2015 to 2023 in computer science.

to the others, indicating an uneven citation distribution for that individual scientist. Conversely, the

diversity values of other computer scientists range between 55% and 85%, with a distinct division at 70%.

Below this threshold, there are 7 Turing award winners, and above it, there are also 7 winners. This

suggests that the citation diversity is lower for the 7 scientists (below 70%) compared to those above it.

In this analysis, the confidence interval is minimal, except for two cases. For better understanding, we

maintain the same order of the award winners on the x-axis in Fig. 14b as in Fig. 14a, where they are

arranged in ascending order of diversity values. However, no meaningful pattern is observed from the

total citation range in Fig. 14b but there is a clear pattern in diversity values of each scientists shown in

Fig. 14a.

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 14: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of Turing prize winners during (2015-2023) in computer

science, along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for the citation

counts of each of them.

5.

Nobel prize winners in Economics

The first Nobel Memorial Prize in economic sciences was awarded in 1969.

As of 2023, 55 prizes

in economic sciences have been given to 93 individuals.

We considered the publication data of 15

distinguished economists between 2017-2023. Table XI presents the diversity values and average citation



18

counts for these 15 individual Nobel laureates in economics. Fig. 15a displays the citation diversity

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

Eco1 (2023)

147.54 83.92

Eco2 (2022)

352.53 77.60

Eco3 (2022)

554.38 72.74

Eco4 (2022)

143.22 51.51

Eco5 (2021)

166.18 82.97

Eco6 (2021)

299.72 73.64

Eco7 (2021)

313.47 81.01

Eco8 (2020)

259.66 77.51

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

Eco9 (2020)

95.00 68.37

Eco10 (2019)

169.13 80.57

Eco11 (2019)

279.92 79.09

Eco12 (2019)

72.81 82.32

Eco13 (2018)

143.30 82.16

Eco14 (2018)

521.79 44.42

Eco15 (2017)

402.01 74.54

TABLE XI: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity (D) of 15 Nobel prize

winners in economics (2017-2023).

values for each laureate, showing that two recent laureates have very low diversity. In contrast, citation

diversity of the other laureates ranging from 70% to 85%, implying a more balanced citation distribution

across their publications. The small confidence intervals for these values reinforce the accuracy of our

diversity calculations. Fig. 15b presents a box-plot of the total citations for each laureate, maintaining

the same order of laureates as in Fig. 15a for easy comparison. Although the total citation counts vary

among the laureates, it does not provide any significant insights into citation distribution. Instead, our

diversity values effectively illustrate the extent of citation counts among these economics laureates.

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 15: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of Nobel laureates during (2017-2023) in economics, along

with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for the citation counts of each

of them.

6.

The Nobel Prize winners in Physiology/Medicine

The Nobel prize in physiology/medicine has been awarded 114 times to a total of 227 laureates from

1901 to 2023. Our analysis focuses on two distinct groups: 15 laureates from the period 2017 to 2023

and another 15 from the period 1902 to 1923.

Table XII presents the citation diversity values and

corresponding average citation counts for all of their publications.

In Fig. 16, we show the diversity values and total citation ranges for 15 recent Nobel laureates in

Physiology/Medicine. Fig. 16a categorizes them into three groups: five laureates with diversity below

85%, eight between 85%-90%, and two above 90%, indicating high citation diversity overall. The minimal

confidence intervals confirm the reliability of these diversity values. In Fig. 17, we examine diversity values

and citation ranges of earlier laureates, with most diversity values falling between 65%-87%, except for

a laureate from 1904 who shows significant low citation diversity. The broader confidence intervals for

these early laureates suggest greater uncertainty in the data, unlike the more reliable and precise values

seen in recent times.

In summary, this comprehensive analysis across multiple disciplines— physics, chemistry, mathemat-

ics, computer science, economics, and physiology or medicine demonstrates the significance of citation

diversity values as a more insightful metric than total or average citation counts. In physics, our analysis

illustrate that diversity values have risen over time among Nobel laureates. In chemistry, despite an

increase in average citation counts, diversity values have remained stable, underscoring their role in re-

vealing citation distribution. Similar findings in mathematics reinforce the relevance of this measure. For

Turing award winners in computer science, our calculated diversity measure effectively captures citation



19

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

Med1 (2023)

111.00 81.76

Med2 (2023)

160.58 81.65

Med3 (2022)

194.66 87.18

Med4 (2021)

272.42 87.25

Med5 (2021)

405.67 80.78

Med6 (2020)

152.00 88.11

Med7 (2020)

117.09 83.78

Med8 (2019)

220.28 86.70

Med9 (2019)

287.89 85.89

Med10 (2019)

182.39 82.40

Med11 (2018)

239.69 86.06

Med12 (2018)

134.80 84.59

Med13 (2017)

109.78 89.56

Med14 (2017)

106.91 91.27

Med15 (2017)

123.39 90.17

Nobel Laureates

Nc

D

MedO1 (1902)

11.61 74.00

MedO2 (1903)

8.00 85.56

MedO3 (1904)

21.75 49.05

MedO4 (1905)

12.08 79.20

MedO5 (1906)

42.05 85.84

MedO6 (1908)

12.42 85.08

MedO7 (1910)

58.13 82.72

MedO8 (1911)

3.67 81.92

MedO9 (1914)

9.24 65.30

MedO10 (1920)

59.63 74.14

MedO11 (1922)

9.72 76.17

MedO12 (1923)

66.69 64.33

MedO13 (1923)

2.82 87.07

MedO14 (1926)

7.43 87.36

MedO15 (1927)

20.00 82.23

TABLE XII: Average citation count (Nc) per publication and citation diversity (D) of 15 Nobel

laureates during 2017 to 2023 and 15 laureates during 1902 to 1927 in physiology/medicine.

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 16: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of recent Nobel laureates during (2017-2023) in

physiology/medicine, along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for

the citation counts of each of them.

distribution. In economics, high diversity values offering a comprehensive understanding of laureates’

citation patterns. In physiology or medicine, diversity values have increased in recent times, indicating a

more equitable distribution of citations among publications. Since the awards in mathematics, computer

science and economics began relatively later we cannot provide a comparative analysis, over time, of

the citation diversity values in these 3 disciplines. Our analysis advocate the adoption of more nuanced

metrics in evaluating scholarly impact, fostering a fairer assessment of academic contributions across

various scientific fields.

D.

Citation diversity in the publication of prize winning male and female scientists

Gender bias in paper citations plays a crucial role in making women’s research less visible. Some

well-documented studies [48],[43] highlight the under-attribution of women’s contributions in scientific

research, evidenced by a citation gap between male and female authors.

However, men and women

still publish at similar annual rates and have comparable career-wise impact, with career length and

dropout rates explaining many disparities [25]. In an unique approach to gender-based citation analysis,

our objective is to examine the uniformity in the distribution of citations of the publications of recent

award-winning male and female scientists across six scientific disciplines using the citation diversity

measure.

Table XIII provides detailed information on the number of male and female award-winning scientists

across different scientific disciplines, along with the period of our analysis. Additionally, the table includes

the average citation count per publication for all male and female award winners in different disciplines

and our calculated diversity values for these scientists. It is noted that among 126 recent award winners

across six disciplines, there were no female scientists in mathematics and computer science during the

period under consideration. In a graphical representation, Fig. 18a reveals that although both male and



20

(a) Citation diversity (D) with confidence intervals.

(b) Box-plot of the total citation count.

FIG. 17: (a) Citation diversity (red dots) of earlier Nobel laureates during (1902-1927) in

physiology/medicine, along with their 95% confidence intervals (blue vertical lines) and (b) box-plot for

the citation counts of each of them.

female scientists exhibit high diversity values, male scientists generally have higher diversity values than

female scientists in physics, economics, and physiology/medicine (in physics and physiology/medicine

the diversity values of male are very close). In chemistry, however, female award winners show a more

even citation distribution than their male counterparts. Both male and female scientists in physics and

chemistry have high diversity values (above 90%). Conversely, in economics and physiology/medicine,

there is a significant difference in diversity values with female scientists. Additionally, Fig. 18b depicts

the total citation for male and female award winners in these four disciplines. Given the greater number

of male scientists, their total citation range is higher. However, when examining the average citation

count per scientist, female scientists in chemistry have a higher average, supporting the diversity value


## findings. While the average citation count and total citation range provide some insights, the diversity


values more effectively illustrate citation distribution among male and female award winners in each

discipline.

Period of


## Analysis


Number of

Scientists

Nc

D

Male Female

Male

Female Male Female

Physics

(2017-2023)

18

3

39509.11 14823.00 94.45

91.93

Chemistry

(2015-2023)

17

4

49810.94 54145.25 91.42

96.66

Mathematics

(2007-2023)

21

0

7117.48

- 89.89

-

Computer Science

(2010-2023)

21

0

54503.90

- 74.22

-

Economics

(2013-2023)

19

2

19687.58 16950.50 93.40

85.12

Physiology/Medicine (2014-2023)

18

3

54248.83 16066.33 94.80

78.28

Discipline

TABLE XIII: Average citation count (Nc) per scientist and citation diversity (D) of male and female

award winners in various disciplines

(a) Citation diversity (D).

(b) Box-plot of total citation count.

FIG. 18: Gender-wise citation diversity and box-plots of total citations for award winning scientists in

different disciplines



21

V.


## CONCLUSION


Our extensive study on citation analysis sheds light on various aspects of global citation diversity,

offering a detailed understanding of citation patterns across different countries and academic disciplines.

Key highlights of our work may be summarized as follows:

• Distribution pattern of citation counts: We have examined the distribution of citation counts

among top institutes across various countries, revealing the Pareto law nature of the upper end of

the distribution with a breakdown at the lower end. It has also been showed how the Pareto law’s

scaling exponent changes with the number of institutes considered across the globe.

• Novel citation diversity measure: A novel log-normal entropy (LNE) has been used to measure

citation diversity in our analysis. Previous researches have extensively explored diversity measures

across various fields, employing different metrics to assess citation distributions. However, this

study marks the first instance of using an entropy-based diversity measure specifically to quan-

tify citation distribution. We have utilized this innovative metric to effectively measure citation

diversity, enhancing our understanding of the disparities in citation patterns.

• Institutional citation diversity measure across the world: We calculated citation diversity measures

with confidence intervals, grouping countries based on these measures with respect to top few (10,

20, or 50) institutes worldwide. This revealed that many small countries share groups with large

economic powers, and these groupings shift with the number of institutes considered. Box-plots

have been utilized to study the total number of citations, suggesting the emergence of subgroups

based on citation counts.

• Discipline-wise citation diversity: We further calculated citation diversity along with total citation

counts of award winning scientists in six disciplines (21 scientists from each discipline), physics,

chemistry, mathematics, computer science, economics and physiology/medicine, uncovering the

importance of measuring citation diversity of award winners across disciplines. Time evolution

of the citation diversity across disciplines over the century has also been studied in three main

disciplines (physics, chemistry and physiology/medicine).

• Citation diversity of publications of award winning individual scientists: Citation diversity mea-

sures have analyzed for publications by award winning scientists in six disciplines (from 2000-2023

with publicly available data of 15 scientists from each disciplines, physics, chemistry, mathematics,

computer science, economics and physiology/medicine), showing significant variation across fields.

This has also been extended to individual award winners from 1901-1920 in three principal disci-

plines. The time evolution of author-wise diversity measures in three disciplines (physics, chemistry

and physiology/medicine) provides insights into how citation patterns change over time.

• Gender-based study in citation diversity: Finally, a gender-based analysis of citation diversity,

during the period 2007-2023, has been done for male and female scientists in four disciplines

(physics, chemistry, economics and physiology/medicine). The absence of female award winners

in two disciplines (mathematics and computer science) has been noted in the considered period of

our analyses.

This extensive study, based on the data of the top institutes or highly acclaimed elite researchers,

underscores the complexity and diversity of citation practices across scientific landscapes, offering a

detailed examination from multiple dimensions and perspectives. Our findings suggest that the new

measure of citation diversity serves as a vital metric to assess the unevenness of the citation distribution,

providing exceptional insights that citation counts alone cannot achieve.

The diversity measure, D

(ranging from 0 to 100) quantifies the uniformity in the distributions of the citation patterns. Higher

values of D indicate more balanced distributions, while lower values suggest concentration among a few

institutions, or a few research articles as the case may be. As a future research project, to portray such

citation diversity analysis of the entire scientific community, one may incorporate the data from a larger

and more diverse group of scientists, beyond just the elite group of top award winners. Further, our


## findings could be compared with established inequality indices to gain deeper insights into the structural


unevenness within the scientific community. Additionally, investigating the lower end of the citation

distributions, either in isolation or in conjunction with other distributional models that adequately fit

the overall data, is another important open research question for future work. This could provide deeper

insight into the factors driving lower citation counts and shed light on the dynamics that govern citation

disparities.



22

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We have submitted the same manuscript on arXiv as a pre-print version [8]. The authors appreciate

constructive suggestions of three anonymous reviewers.

[1] https://web.archive.org/web/20240413201448/https://webometrics.info/en/transparent.

[2] https://www.webometrics.info/en/transparent.

[3] https://www.scopus.com/home.uri.

[4] G. Abramo, C. A. D’Angelo, and A. Soldatenkova. The dispersion of the citation distribution of top scientists’

publications. Scientometrics, 109(3):1588–2861, 2016.

[5] I. Aguillo, J. Bar-Ilan, M. Levene, et al. Comparing university rankings. Scientometrics, 85:243–256, 2010.

[6] S. Banerjee, S. Biswas, B. K. Chakrabarti, et al. Evolutionary dynamics of social inequality and coincidence

of gini and kolkata indices under unrestricted competition.

International Journal of Modern Physics C,

34(04):2350048, 2023.

[7] S. Banerjee, S. Biswas, B. K. Chakrabarti, A. Ghosh, and M. Mitra. Sandpile universality in social inequality:

Gini and kolkata measures. Entropy, 25(5):1099–4300, 2023.

[8] S. Banerjee, A. Ghosh, and B. Basu. Exploring citation diversity in scholarly literature: An entropy-based

approach. arxiv.org/pdf/2409.02592, 2024.

[9] T. S. Bir´o and Z. N´eda. Gintropy: Gini index based generalization of entropy. Entropy, 22(8), 2020.

[10] T. S. Bir´o, A. Telcs, M. J´ozsa, and Z. N´eda. Gintropic scaling of scientometric indexes. Physica A: Statistical

Mechanics and its Applications, 618:128717, 2023.

[11] A. M. Bleda, M. Thelwall, K. Kousha, and I. F. Aguillo. Do highly cited researchers successfully use the

social web? Scientometrics, 101:337–356, 2014.

[12] W. Bossert, P. K. Pattanaik, and Y. XU. The measurement of diversity. Cahiers de recherche 2001-17,

Universite de Montreal, Departement de sciences economiques, 2001.

[13] J. A. Crespo, Y. Li, and J. R. Castillo. The measurement of the effect on citation inequality of differences

in citation practices across scientific fields. PLOS ONE, 8(3):1–9, 2013.

[14] A. J. Daly, J. M. Baetens, and B. D. Baets. Ecological diversity: Measuring the unmeasurable. Mathematics,

6(7):2227–7390, 2018.

[15] K. Dong, J. Wu, and K. Wang. On the inequality of citation counts of all publications of individual authors.

Journal of Informetrics, 15(4):1751–1577, 2021.

[16] M. Flegl and H. Vydrova. Is pareto’s 80-20 rule applicable in research? a case of culs prague. In In 11th

conference on “efficiency and responsibility in education”, Prague, 2014.

[17] E. Garfield. Citation analysis as a tool in journal evaluation. Science, 178(4060):471–9, 1972.

[18] A. Ghosh and A. Basu. A generalized relative (α, β)-entropy: Geometric properties and applications to

robust statistical inference. Entropy, 20(5):1099–4300, 2018.

[19] A. Ghosh and A. Basu. A scale-invariant generalization of the r´enyi entropy, associated divergences and their

optimizations under tsallis’ nonextensive framework. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(4):2141–

2161, 2021.

[20] A. Ghosh and A. Basu. On Entropy Based Diversity Measures: Statistical Efficiency and Robustness Con-

siderations. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2023.

[21] A. Ghosh, B. K. Chakrabarti, D. R. S. Ram, et al. Scaling behavior of the hirsch index for failure avalanches,

percolation clusters, and paper citations. Frontiers in Physics, 10:2296–424X, 2022.

[22] C. J. Gomez, A. C. Herman, and P. Parigi. Leading countries in global science increasingly receive more

citations than other countries doing similar research. Nature Human Behaviour, 6(7):2397–3374, 2022.

[23] H. M. Gupta, J. R. Campanha, and R. A. G. Pesce. Power-law distributions for the citation index of scientific

publications and scientists. Brazilian Journal of Physics, 35(4a):981–986, 2005.

[24] J. E. Hirsch. An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, 102(46):16569–16572, 2005.

[25] J. Huang, A. J. Gates, R. Sinatra, and A. L. Barab´asi. Historical comparison of gender inequality in scientific

careers across countries and disciplines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(9):4609–4616,

2020.

[26] L. Jost. Entropy and diversity. Oikos, 113(2):363–375, 2006.

[27] J. N. Kapur. Some properties of entropy of order α and type β. Proceedings of the Indian Academy of

Sciences, 69(4):201–211, 1962.

[28] J. N. Kapur. Generalized entropy of order α and type β. The Maths. Seminar, 4:78–82, 1967.

[29] T. Leinster and C. A. Cobbold. Measuring diversity: the importance of species similarity. Ecology, 93(3):477–

489, 2012.

[30] L. Leydesdorff. Indicators of structural change in the dynamics of science: Entropy statistics of the SCI

journal citation reports. Scientometrics, 53:131–159, 2002.

[31] L. Leydesdorff, C. S. Wagner, and L. Bornmann. Interdisciplinarity as diversity in citation patterns among

journals: Rao-stirling diversity, relative variety, and the gini coefficient. Journal of Informetrics, 13(1):255–



23

269, 2019.

[32] S. Li, X. Yan, M. Abdullah Al, et al. Ecological and evolutionary processes involved in shaping microbial

habitat generalists and specialists in urban park ecosystems. Msystems, 9(6):e00469–24, 2024.

[33] Y. Li, G. Zhang, Y. Feng, et al. An entropy-based social network community detecting method and its

application to scientometrics. Scientometrics, 102:1003–1017, 2015.

[34] D. Lin, T. Gong, W. Liu, et al. An entropy-based measure for the evolution of h index research. Sciento-

metrics, 125:2283–2298, 2020.

[35] A. Magurran and B. McGill.

Biological Diversity: Frontiers in Measurement and Assessment.

Oxford

University Press, Oxford, 2011.

[36] A. M. Mugabushaka, A. Kyriakou, and T. Papazoglou. Bibliometric indicators of interdisciplinarity: the

potential of the leinster–cobbold diversity indices to study disciplinary diversity. Scientometrics, 107:593–607,

2016.

[37] M. W. Nielsen and J. P. Andersen. Global citation inequality is on the rise. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences, 118(7), 2021.

[38] A. L. Nsakanda, W. L. Price, M. Diaby, and M. Gravel. Ensuring population diversity in genetic algorithms:

A technical note with application to the cell formation problem. European Journal of Operational Research,

178(2):634–638, 2007.

[39] R. Rajaram, B. Castellani, and A. N. Wilson. Advancing shannon entropy for measuring diversity in systems.

Complexity, 2017(1):8715605, 2017.

[40] C. Rao. Diversity and dissimilarity coefficients: A unified approach. Theoretical Population Biology, 21(1):24–

43, 1982.

[41] S. Redner.

How popular is your paper?

an empirical study of the citation distribution. The European

Physical Journal B, 4:131–134, 1998.

[42] A. Renyi. On measures of entropy and informations. in: Neyman, j. (ed.) proceedings of the 4th berkeley

symposium on mathematical statistics and probability. University of California Press, Berkeley, pages 547–

561, 1961.

[43] P. Sebo and C. Clair. Gender inequalities in citations of articles published in high-impact general medical

journals: a cross-sectional study. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 38(3):1525–1497, 2023.

[44] C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3):379–423,

1948.

[45] A. F. Shorrocks. The class of additively decomposable inequality measures. Econometrica, 48(3):613–625,

1980.

[46] E. Simpson. Measurement of diversity. Nature, 163(688), 1949.

[47] A. Stirling. A general framework for analysing diversity in science, technology and society. Journal of the

Royal Society interface, 4(15):707–719, 2007.

[48] E. G. Teich, J. Z. Kim, C. W. Lynn, et al. Citation inequity and gendered citation practices in contemporary

physics. Nature Physics, 18(10):1745–2481, 2022.

[49] A. Yong.

Critique of hirsch’s citation index: a combinatorial fermi problem.

Notices of the American

Mathematical Society, 61(9):1040–50, 2014.