Community-centric modeling of citation dynamics explains

collective citation patterns in science, law, and patents

arXiv:2501.15552v2  [physics.soc-ph]  28 Jan 2025

Sadamori Kojaku1,7,*, Robert Mahari2,3,4,*, Sandro Claudio Lera4,5,+, Esteban Moro4,6, Alex Pentland2,4,

and Yong-Yeol Ahn4,7,+

1Department of Systems Science and Industrial Engineering, Binghamton University, New York, USA

2Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA

3Harvard Law School, Cambridge, USA

4Connection Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA

5Institute of Risk Analysis, Prediction and Management (Risks-X), Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China

6Network Science Institute, Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, USA

7Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research, Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University,

Bloomington, USA

*Authors contributed equally

+Corresponding authors: slera@mit.edu and yyahn@iu.edu

January 29, 2025


## Abstract


Many human knowledge systems, such as science, law, and invention, are built on doc-

uments and the citations that link them. Citations, while serving multiple purposes [1–3],

primarily function as a way to explicitly document the use of prior work and thus have become

central to the study of knowledge systems [4–6]. Analyzing citation dynamics has revealed sta-

tistical patterns that shed light on knowledge production, recognition, and formalization [5, 7–

14], and has helped identify key mechanisms driving these patterns [5, 15, 16]. However, most

quantitative findings are confined to scientific citations, raising the question of universality

of these findings. Moreover, existing models of individual citation trajectories fail to explain

phenomena such as delayed recognition, calling for a unifying framework. Here, we analyze a

newly available corpus of U.S. case law, in addition to scientific and patent citation networks,

to show that they share remarkably similar citation patterns, including a heavy-tailed distribu-

tion of sleeping beauties. We propose a holistic model that captures the three core mechanisms

driving collective dynamics and replicates the elusive phenomenon of delayed recognition. We

demonstrate that the model not only replicates observed citation patterns, but also better

1



predicts future successes by considering the whole system. Our work offers insights into key

mechanisms that govern large-scale patterns of collective human knowledge systems and may

provide generalizable perspectives on discovery and innovation across domains.

1


## Introduction


Human culture is built on the ability to record and accumulate knowledge and experience as well as

the capacity to use those accumulated experiences to negotiate and resolve conflicts. These abilities

have become formalized into knowledge systems such as science and law. Human knowledge systems

are often built upon publications and citations where each publication represents a unit of facts,

knowledge, or argument, and citations formally document the use of prior works.

Since citations are fundamental to the evolution of knowledge systems, they have been indexed,

counted, and analyzed [4, 14, 17–20]. Examining how scientists publish and cite prior work has

revealed both nomothetic and idiographic insights into collective formalization of scientific knowl-

edge. Citations have been found to serve a number of functions, including as the result of practical

incentives to grow research labs [2], as the basis for arguments that resolve disagreements [21], and

as a currency that underpins scientific reputation and status [22]. More quantitative research seeks

to measure statistical properties of citation systems, which also facilitates quantitative predictions

about the future trajectory of publications and fields. For instance, it has been shown that the

number of new citations tends to be proportional to a publication’s existing number of citations

(known as preferential attachment, the Matthew Effect, or “the rich get richer”) [5, 8]. At the same

time, new knowledge attracts attention while older knowledge is gradually forgotten, which leads to

the recency bias, a tendency to cite recent publications over old counterparts, contributing to the

integration of novel discoveries into our knowledge base [9, 10, 15]. Meanwhile, some publications

(“sleeping beauties”) go unnoticed for decades before experiencing a surge in attention [13, 23–25].

Although there have been indications that citation patterns may be universal across citation-based

knowledge systems, system-level data and measurements, particularly for legal systems, have not

been readily available. Furthermore, the delayed recognition phenomenon has been elusive to model

within the current paradigm of citation models that are built on preferential attachment and col-

lective forgetting because these directly exclude the possibility of discovering “sleeping beauties”.

Here, we leverage a newly available dataset of U.S. federal judicial opinions, and the associated

citation network, to demonstrate that three knowledge systems fundamental to human civilization—

2



science, law, and invention—exhibit remarkably similar large-scale patterns. We propose a holistic

model that succinctly captures the key mechanisms that are sufficient to produce these shared

patterns, resolving the paradox of sleeping beauties along the way.

Scientists produce new knowledge by building on prior contributions [4–6, 26]. In ‘common

law’ jurisdictions, which cover a third of the global population [27], judges and lawyers base their

legal reasoning on citations to prior judicial decisions (precedent). As a result, the common law

constantly evolves as judges issue new decisions (see SI Appendix A for an overview of the US

federal law system). For over 150 years, U.S. jurists have used citations to systematize the precedent

landscape but only relatively recently have these citations been analyzed in a quantitative manner

at a large scale [6]. In patent applications, inventors cite prior art to contextualize their inventions

and to distinguish their contributions from past inventions. Patent examiners use these citations

to determine whether an invention reaches the threshold for patentability and may add their own

citations to prior art.

While science, patents, and law are collective knowledge systems built on citations, they are

distinct in terms of their incentives, norms, and procedures (see SI Appendix B). For instance,

anyone can, in principle, publish in scientific journals or file a patent, whereas one has to be elected

or appointed as a judge to publish a judicial opinion.

Scientists and inventors usually choose

what to work on while judges are assigned to cases at random.

The number of scientists and

inventors has been growing rapidly while the number of U.S. federal judges has remained relatively

stable. Inventions are primarily driven by commercial interests, unlike science and law. The U.S.

legal system features a codified, binding hierarchy (e.g., Supreme Court decisions supersede all

other precedents), while other systems do not. These differences prompt an examination of the

generalizability of the “laws of citation” observed in science and an exploration of whether the

evolution and formalization of knowledge systems through citations follow similar patterns across

different systems.

Here, we show that, despite the differences between how these systems produce knowledge, the

fundamental statistical citation dynamics are remarkably similar in terms of characteristics, includ-

ing preferential attachment, exponential growth, citation recency, and delayed recognition (sleeping

beauties). Based on this, we argue that the formalization of knowledge may be largely shaped by

intrinsic human constraints and robust basic mechanisms, and the resulting statistical patterns are

robust against numerous factors that distinguish individual knowledge systems. Although current

models of citation dynamics can capture some of these patterns [5, 8, 15], they are unable to account

3



for all of them. While these existing models focus on individual publications that receive citations,

we argue that capturing the dynamics of the entire knowledge communities that cite is the key to

understanding the dynamics of knowledge systems as a whole. Thus, we introduce the Community

Citation Model (CCM) that describes how an entire knowledge system collectively evolves, iden-

tifies, and builds on existing knowledge. The CCM sheds light on the quantitative mechanisms

behind the creation of new knowledge and how important contributions can be discovered after

being unnoticed for a long time. We show that our model not only explains the aforementioned

patterns but also better predicts the future citation success of publications by holistically modeling

the evolution of the whole system.

2


## Results


2.1

Universal citation patterns

To investigate the universality of statistical citation patterns, we examine three distinct knowledge

systems: science, patents, and common law. For scientific citations, we primarily use the compre-

hensive SciSciNet dataset, though we also employ the American Physical Society (APS) dataset

when conducting computationally intensive analyses due to the large size of SciSciNet dataset

(results from SciSciNet are labeled as “Science,” while those from the APS dataset are labeled as

“APS”). For patent citations, we examine data from the United States Patent and Trademark Office

(USPTO). These citation datasets are extensively studied and well documented [5, 8–10, 13, 15, 28–

30] (see Section 4.1 for data preprocessing). In the legal domain, we concentrate on the U.S. federal

system as a good representation of judicial citation dynamics, including reliance on precedent and

the binding hierarchy of legal decisions (SI Appendix A). While citation patterns in science and

patents have been subject to extensive study, less work has compared patterns across different sys-

tems or focused on statistical dynamics of legal citations. Examining fundamental citation patterns

that are well-known from science, including citation growth, preferential attachment, recency, and

delayed recognition, we find that all three systems demonstrate strikingly similar dynamics (see

Fig. 1) despite their different modi operandi (see SI Appendix B).

First, all three systems display exponential growth in the number of publications and citations

(see Fig. 1A and Fig. 6A). Although this phenomenon has been documented in the realm of science

since at least 1965 [5], it is noteworthy to observe this growth in the legal domain, considering

4



5

A

Number of papers

Probability mass

New citations

Proportion of citations

Survival probability

Science

Patent

Law

Year

B

Degree

C

D

Accumulated citations

Age

E

Sleeping beauty coeﬃcient, B + 13

Figure 1:

Universal patterns of citation dynamics across three knowledge systems (law, science,

and patents). A. Exponential growth in publications. B. Degree distribution of the publications. C.

Linear preferential attachment, where the number of new citations acquired in a year is proportional

to the accumulated number of citations. D. Aging function representing the probability that a

publication receives the x + 1th citation at age ∆t, where x ∈{25, 50, 100}. E. Skewed distribution

of the Sleeping Beauty coefficient (B).



that the number of U.S. federal judges has remained relatively constant over time. Second, the

number of references cited by each publication also exhibits exponential growth across all systems,

reflecting the growing amount of relevant knowledge that is required to produce new knowledge or

perhaps the growing “burden of knowledge” [31] (see Fig. 6B). Our observation is inconsistent with

a previous study [32] that claimed the number of references in science grows logarithmically rather

than exponentially. Our validation showed that the logarithmic growth fits poorly, especially for

law and patents, compared to the exponential growth (SI Appendix E). Third, citation networks in

all three systems display power-law degree distributions, and citation dynamics exhibit preferential

attachment [3, 8] (Fig. 1B and C). Fourth, even though publications tend to accumulate citations

over time due to preferential attachment, older publications become less likely to be cited as their

novelty and relevance diminish [9, 15, 33].

In fact, the probability that a publication receives

the x + 1-th citation at age ∆t peaks within the first 10 years and decreases over time (Fig. 1D;

see Section 4.2 for how to compute this probability). This pattern of obsolescence can be found

across all systems. Finally, we observe that all systems exhibit unexpectedly abundant delayed

recognition of some publications, a phenomenon commonly referred to as “Sleeping Beauties” or

“delayed recognition” [25, 34]. As shown in Fig. 1E, the “Sleeping Beauty coefficient” B [13], which

captures the intensity of a publication’s delayed recognition, has heavier tails than what would be

expected based on preferential attachment alone. A striking example of this phenomenon is the 1935

article by Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen, which garnered limited attention for

nearly 70 years before witnessing a citation explosion. Similarly, the Court of Appeals case United

States v. Hooton, in which an appeal was dismissed for being insubstantial, was virtually uncited

for two decades before being discovered (or “awakened”) and cited explosively.

Our findings reveal that all three systems display an extensive set of universal macroscopic

citation dynamics.

The observed universality of citation patterns implies that, despite the nu-

merous distinct characteristics of knowledge generation across systems, the process of knowledge

formalization through citations may be predominantly universal.

2.2

Modeling universal citation dynamics

A prevailing explanation of universal citation patterns is captured by the long-term citation model

(LTCM) [15, 35]. The LTCM posits that the number of citations a publication receives depends on

the following three features of the publication itself: the publication’s intrinsic quality (‘fitness’), its

6



7

Embedding

A

Network generation

Citation network

Fitness

Adjacent production

Fitness

Citations

Low

Randomly chosen publication

High

i

Age

New

New

publication

Old

Distance

Aging

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</latexit>P(j | i) / ⌘j(cj(ti) + c0)f(ti −tj)exp(cos(uj, ui))

Inference

Law

Patent

Science

B

Number of new citations

Proportion of citations

Survival probability

Accumulated citations

C

Age (Year)

D

Sleeping beauty coeﬃcient, B + 13

Figure 2:

The Community Citation Model (CCM) reproduces universal citation patterns. A. A

publication is represented as a point in a vector space. A new publication is placed near a randomly

chosen existing publication and cites nearby publications according to Eqs. (4) and (5). B–D.

The CCM reproduces preferential attachment, recency, and the skewed sleeping beauty coefficient

distribution. In C we show the aging function for publications with 50 references. We compare the

CCM to the preferential attachment model (PAM) and the long-term citation model (LTCM).



recency (‘aging’), and the number of accumulated citations (‘preferential attachment’). Together,

these components describe the probability that publication i cites publication j:

PLTCM(j | i) =

1

Z(ti) (cj(ti) + c0) ηj f(ti −tj ; µj, σj),

(1)

where cj(ti) represents the number of citations that publication j has received by the time ti when

publication i is published, and c0 is a pre-defined parameter to offset citations to prevent the citation

probability from being zero. We set c0 = 30 per the original paper [15]. Fitness ηj > 0 signifies the

publication’s intrinsic quality. The denominator, Z(ti), is a normalization constant. The function

f(·) is a log-normal distribution characterizing the aging effect,

"

#

−(log(t −tj) −µj)2

f(t −tj ; µj, σj) =

1

σj

p

2π(t −tj)

exp

(t > tj),

(2)

2σ2

j

parameterized by publication-level mean µj and variance σj parameters specific to publication j.

Naturally, the probability of citing a publication before it is published is zero, i.e., f(t −tj) = 0 if

t ⩽tj. The LTCM is reduced to the preferential attachment model (PAM) if the recency f(·) and

intrinsic quality ηj are constant across all publications and time:

PPAM(j | i) ∝(cj(ti) + c0).

(3)

Although the LTCM has been evaluated with scientific citations, it is inherently difficult for the

model to explain certain phenomena like sleeping beauties that deviate from the assumed aging

function [15, 35]. To explore how well it explains the patterns observed across all three knowledge

systems, we fit the LTCM to science, legal, and patent citation networks using maximum likelihood

estimation [35] and regenerate the citation trajectories of publications (See Section 4.7). Similarly,

we fit the PAM to the three networks. The LTCM reproduces preferential attachment and recency

patterns for all three systems (Fig. 2). However, by construction, neither the LTCM nor PAM

give rise to enough sleeping beauties because the probability of “discovering” a relatively uncited

publication after a long time is low in both models. The high fitness necessary for the “awakening”

is at odds with a publication experiencing delayed recognition. This implies that neither model

accounts for the discovery process that appears to be at work across knowledge systems.

Examining the models’ implicit assumptions reveals that the LTCM and PAM share the same

8



perspective on success (in terms of citations): in both models, the probability of citation is entirely

determined by the attributes of the publication itself.

In other words, these models completely

overlook the collective context or knowledge landscape of existing publications. Of course, this is

far from reality, where both the production of knowledge and citation decisions are heavily influenced

by the community’s collective dynamics. These collective dynamics influence the areas in which

new knowledge is produced and which existing publications are discovered. As a major departure

from the existing models, we consider that citations to a publication are not solely a result of the

cited publication’s attributes, but rather a reflection of collective decisions by the authors of the

citing publications. Our idea echoes the adage: “Success isn’t about you, it’s about us” [36].

Our empirical results described in Section 2.1 already hint at these collective phenomena. Sleep-

ing beauties, for instance, are fundamentally impossible to be explained by models that only take

the cited publication’s attributes into account. By contrast, they can be naturally explained by

a knowledge community that shifts its attention, explores yet undiscovered knowledge, and finally

“discovers” neglected publications.

Our new model of knowledge formalization—the Community Citation Model (CCM)—builds

on this idea that collective attention, and the dynamics of collectives are the key to capturing

the dynamics of knowledge systems. To this end, we imagine a space of knowledge containing all

possible knowledge and corresponding publications. Intuitively, new publications are most likely to

emerge in “hot” areas—dense and fast-growing regions of knowledge space, also known as “emerging

research fronts” [37]. Occasionally, however, a prescient publication may appear in an empty space

that has yet to be explored. If this publication was “fit” but “too early”, it can go unnoticed for

a long time, until the whole community finally moves to the region and discovers the publication.

This scenario highlights how citations depend not only on publications’ inherent characteristics but

also on their relationship to where the rest of the community is located within the knowledge space.

Operationally, we represent the space of knowledge by a K-dimensional spherical space (Fig. 2A).

Unit vector ui represents the location of publication i in the knowledge space. We propose a zero-

knowledge baseline model that randomly places a new publication by first picking an existing

publication j uniformly at random and then placing a new publication i around j based on the von

Mises distribution centered at j, i.e.,

P(uj | ui) ∝exp (−λd(ui, uj)) ,

(4)

9



where λ is a scaling parameter that controls the closeness between the new publication i and the

existing publication j, in terms of the cosine distance, d(ui, uj) = 1 −ui · uj. When λ is large,

new publications tend to appear in closer proximity to existing publications, leading to strongly

concentrated clusters. As λ decreases, the concentration becomes less pronounced, and publications

are more spread out. As a new publication is placed, it cites existing publication j according to the

following probability model:

PCCM(j | i; ui, uj) =

1

Z(ti) (cj(ti) + c0) ηj exp(−κd(ui, uj)),

(5)

where κ is a scaling parameter that controls the contribution of the closeness to the citation prob-

ability (see Methods for details). We set c0 = 20 and verify that different values of c0 yield similar


## results (see SI Appendix H)


The fundamental shift that distinguishes our model from the LTCM is that now the citation

probability is defined from the perspective of the citing publication. While the LTCM’s probabil-

ity model is solely dependent on the properties of the cited publication, our model considers the

relevance of existing citations based on the location of the citing publications. Another crucial

distinction is the lack of an explicit aging mechanism in the model. To capture the aging dynamics

(recency bias), the LTCM must prescribe an explicit aging function and estimate aging parameters

for each publication. We find that, however, the aging factor f is not necessary to reproduce the

recency bias (Fig. 2C), and incorporating the aging factor into the CCM does not significantly alter

the results, except for a substantial reduction of sleeping beauties (see SI Appendix H.2). This

suggests that a publication’s aging may not be an inherent mechanism but is confounded by other,

more fundamental mechanisms. The CCM’s ability to reproduce the recency bias without explicit

aging can be attributed to collective attention; new publications are more likely to be produced in

a dense area of the knowledge space. As the focus of research communities drifts in the knowledge

space, the citation probability for older publications decreases. This mechanism, together with the

exponential growth of publications, gives rise to the recency bias. The CCM thus offers a powerful

explanation of how aging of knowledge products can occur without explicitly implementing it into

the model, further underscoring the importance of modeling collective citation dynamics.

Modeling the production of new publications and the creation of citations allows us to simulate

the collective evolution of an entire knowledge system, rather than the citation trajectories of

individual publications. We fit the CCM using maximum likelihood estimation (Section 4.5) to

10



generate citation networks. The generated citation networks closely mirror the empirical networks.

They not only reproduce the preferential attachment and recency patterns observed across all

three systems (Figs. 2B and C), but also reproduce the relative abundance of “sleeping beauties”

(Fig. 2D).

How and why can the CCM produce more sleeping beauties? An examination of some of the

most pronounced “sleeping” publications provides insight into the underlying mechanism that is

captured by the CCM (Fig. 3B). Many sleeping beauty publications tend to appear in sparsely

occupied niches in the knowledge space, far away from the mainstream, and as a result, they are

unlikely to be cited. Over time, however, knowledge communities evolve and drift in the knowledge

space, stumbling upon a sleeping publication. As a result, an initially neglected publication may,

over time, be placed at the vanguard of a growing field. We find evidence of this “ahead of its

time” mechanism across all three systems (Fig. 3B). This explanation highlights why modeling the

collective dynamics rather than individual publication is the key to capturing this phenomenon.

A by-product of the CCM is the knowledge embedding space, where we can examine how

published knowledge is organized in the high-dimensional space and build on prior work that seeks

to map scientific knowledge [38, 39]. Despite the observed universality of empirical citation patterns,

we find that the three domains of knowledge feature different types of community structure (Fig 3A).

In law, we find publications to be organized primarily into three communities, aligned with the

hierarchy of U.S. federal courts. By contrast, in APS and patents, the structure seems to be driven

by topics, with a stronger separation in science.

The CCM also provides insights into why the number of references in publications might have

been growing across all three systems (see Fig. 6B). Based on the CCM, we expect that references

will typically be within some relatively small radius of the citing publication’s position in the knowl-

edge space. If the radius of citations decreases, reference growth can be understood as the result of

a form of specialization, where publications are citing more of their close neighbors. We find that,

in APS and patents, the radius of citation—defined by the average distance between a publication

and its references—has decreased while the number of references has grown (see SI Appendix E).

This suggests that specialization and “the burden of knowledge” may be increasing [31]. However,

the citation radii appear more stable in law, which may result from the fact that U.S. judges, unlike

scientists and inventors, are generalists.

Overall, by focusing on the collectives that cite publications rather than focusing on the in-

trinsic attributes of cited publications, the CCM elucidates a plausible mechanism underlying

11



A

Law

APS

Patent

Geophysics

and astromy

Physics

Classical

Appeal

Physics

Gas, plasmas,

and discharges

Elementary

Electricity

Particle

General

Interdisciplinary

Physics

Atomic &

Modulecular

Supreme

Mechanical

Engineering

District

Fixed

constructions

Physics

General tech

development

Condensed

Chemistry;

metallurgy

Matter

Nuclear

Human

necessities

physics

B

Birth year

5 years befor awakening

Awakening year

5 years after awakening

1982

2005

2010

2015

Law

Hand

powered tool

1951

1989

1994

1999

APS

1955

2009

2014

2019

Patent

+

0

Paper density

Figure 3: Embeddings learned by the CCM reveal community structures that help explain universal

citation dynamics. A. 2D projection of the 128-dimensional embedding by UMAP. The projection is

generated with ten nearest neighbors and cosine similarity as the proximity metric. B. The evolution

of the embedding space in the neighborhood of the top sleeping beauties (SB). The brighter yellow

areas represent dense areas of knowledge space in the five years leading up to the date displayed,

which we approximate via kernel density estimation. We define the neighborhood as the 3,000

publications that are closest to the focal SBs marked by stars. The red circles represent other SBs

in the vicinity. The embeddings are projected into 2D using Principal Component Analysis.

12



sleeping beauties and patterns related to increased specialization, which cannot be understood

by publication-centric models.

2.3

Forecasting citation trajectories

The CCM’s ability to simulate the evolution of a whole knowledge system raises another interesting

possibility: Can this collective perspective also be used to forecast future citations? Intuitively, a

publication situated in a fast-growing niche may attract more citations than a publication in an

empty space. Estimating a publication’s “location” in knowledge space may thus allow us to better

predict future citations for all publications, including sleeping beauties.

We test this hypothesis by forecasting the citation trajectories using models trained on five years

of historical citation trajectories. Specifically, we train the PAM, LTCM, and CCM on citation

trajectories from 2000 that received at least 15 citations by 2005.

We use the trained models

to predict the counts of citations from unseen publications from 2006 to 2020 and compare them

against the actual counts of citations from those unseen publications. We perform the same analysis

for publications published in 1990 and obtain qualitatively similar results (see SI Appendix H.5).

We repeat the experiment five times using different random seeds.

In each simulated year, nt new publications are produced, with each publication i citing mi


## references. For the sake of simplicity, we use the actual values of nt and mi in the test set. We


compute the prediction error by the logarithmic difference between the actual and predicted (i.e.,

simulated) annual citations given by |log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|, where c(t) and ˆc(t) are the num-

ber of actual citations and the number of predicted citations from unseen publications from 2006

and 2020, respectively. Note that c(t) and ˆc(t) are not the accumulated number of citations at time

t; they represent new citations that the publication received after the training time window (i.e.,

year 2006 and onward).

Although the prediction errors tend to converge to those of baseline models (especially PAM),

the CCM makes the best short-term predictions, suggesting that its simulated community dynamics,

despite its random zero-knowledge nature, capture the collective dynamics (Fig. 4A). However, the

CCM excels at predicting the citations trajectories for top-10% most cited publications, maintaining

a sizable margin compared to the other models over time (Fig. 4B). It is important to distinguish

highly cited papers from sleeping beauties: although sleeping beauties are, by construction, highly

cited, highly cited papers also include those that are heavily cited shortly after publication. The

13



CCM’s superior performance also holds for even more highly cited publications (e.g., top-5%; see SI


## Appendix H.4). To further validate the predictability of citations, we evaluate the citation models


using an information retrieval setup. We use the same training data as before to train the models

to identify the top-10% most cited publications among all publications that earned at least 15

citations by 2005. The results confirm that the CCM achieves the highest average precision, further

underscoring the strong prediction capacity of CCM for highly cited publications (Fig. 4C). The

CCM’s success in predicting highly cited publications can be attributed to collective dynamics, a

factor considered by the CCM but not by the PAM and LTCM.

We test if the performance of the CCM results from the larger number of parameters as compared

to the LTCM. To this end, we limit the embedding dimensionality to K = 3, resulting in a smaller

CCM that has the same number of parameters as the LTCM (SI Appendix G for the number of

parameters). Even this small CCM achieves higher precision in predicting highly-cited publications

than the LTCM (see SI Figure 10).

Overall, the CCM surpasses the PAM and LTCM in predicting which publications will have

the most significant future impact. More importantly, the collective dynamics, not captured by

the PAM and LTCM, appear to have a substantial effect on predicting the trajectories of the most

impactful publications.

14



15

Errors in predicting citations

Oygn1AZyiZNMJzTxI7gil7Ye48VfcuFDEjQvBvzFtZ6HVA4GTc+7l3nu8RHAFlvVl5JaWV1bX8uFjc2t7R1zd6+p4lRS1qCxiGXbI4oJHrEGcBCsnUhGQk+wlje4nvqteyYVj6M7GCbMDUk/4j6nBLTUNc8cwXwYOyLu4xItQRkf2V8Mv9jJyCA5yrWsiN5P4Bx1yxaFWsG/JfYGSmiDPWu+eH0YpqGLAIqiFId20rAHREJnAo2KTipYgmhA9JnHU0jEjLljmbHTfCRVnrYj6V+kd5mqv7sGJFQqWHo6cqQKAWvan4n9dJwb90RzxKUmARnQ/yU4EhxtOkcI9LRkEMNSFUcr0rpgGRhILOs6BDsBdP/kuapxX7vFK9rRZrV1kceXSADlEJ2egC1dANqMGougBPaEX9Go8Gs/Gm/E+L80ZWc8+gXj8xuZ753</latexit>|log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|

A

Law

Science

Patent

Error in predicting citations for the top 10% highly-cited papers

B

Average precision for the top 10% highly-cited papers

C

Figure 4:

Prediction of citation counts for individual publications published in 2000 using initial

citation trajectories of 5 years. A. Citation prediction errors for the CCM, PA, and LTCM over time.

The error is calculated by ˆc(t), i.e., | log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|, where c(t) and ˆc(t) are the actual

and predicted citations in year t from the unseen publications published after the training window,

respectively. The 95% confidence intervals are estimated by bootstrapping. B. Citation prediction

errors for the top-10% highly-cited publications. The CCM has the lowest prediction errors overall,

especially for young publications and highly cited publications. C. Precision for identifying the

top-10% highly-cited publications. A precision of 0.1 corresponds to random guessing.



3


## Discussion


We report that, using a newly available corpus of U.S. judicial opinions, three fundamental knowl-

edge systems share universal large-scale citation patterns and propose a holistic model that suc-

cinctly captures three fundamental mechanisms of citation processes—relevance, cumulative advan-

tage, and fitness—that are sufficient to reproduce these large-scale patterns. Our results suggest

that the formalization of knowledge in human knowledge systems may be driven by a small set

of mechanisms. For instance, preferential attachment may robustly emerge across all knowledge

systems due to the inherent difficulty of discovering a particular piece of knowledge from a massive

preexisting pool, which subsequently creates a reliance on social signals. This herding behavior may

also be behind the delayed recognition phenomenon when there is an initial lack of social signals to

cite an otherwise important and useful knowledge. A large body of prior work leverages citations to

understand scientific systems [2, 5, 8, 21, 40] and we contribute to this literature by studying three

distinct systems in a quantitative manner and offering a model that can make predictions about

future citation trajectories across a diverse range of knowledge systems.

Our study distinguishes knowledge formalization from knowledge production. While science,

law, and patents employ different methods to generate new knowledge—and the individuals in these

systems operate under different procedures and incentives—we find evidence that the formalization

of knowledge by means of citations across the systems exhibits universality.

We further show

that modeling knowledge systems as collective processes more accurately captures the dynamics of

knowledge formalization. Our model rests on three basic and well documented assumptions, namely,

that publications vary in their inherent quality, that publications connected by citation links are

related and tend to cluster in the space of possible topics, and that publications with past success

are likely to experience future success (cumulative advantage or preferential attachment). These

mechanisms emphasize that, despite their ostensible differences and the different time spans of

these datasets, the activity of collective human knowledge systems may yield convergent large-scale

patterns.

We introduce the Community Citation Model (CCM), which explains empirical citation patterns

through the lens of knowledge communities and collective behavior rather than individual publi-

cations. Unlike existing models that track long-term citation dynamics on a per-publication basis,

our model conceptualizes a high-dimensional knowledge space in which publications are situated.

This space lets us define the proximity between publications that underpins their relative relevance

16



and, thus, citation likelihood. We note that proximity in this space is related to citation likelihood

rather than topical relevance, as emphasized by the legal knowledge space that is structured by

courts rather than topics. The conceptualization of a knowledge space also allows us to provide

an intuitive explanation for collective phenomena like aging and delayed recognition. Publications

“age” as a community leaves a niche; sleeping beauty publications are “discovered” when a knowl-

edge community shifts its attention to their niche. These phenomena, rather than being explicitly

added to the model, emerge naturally.

We find that modeling the knowledge space as a whole allows us to better predict the future cita-

tion trajectories of publications, particularly those that will be highly cited. This out-performance

is likely due to the fact that the CCM can take into account the publication’s location in space and

the trajectories of existing knowledge communities. These insights may be leveraged to identify

specific areas of science, technology, and law where innovation is likely to occur, which may be used

to make decisions around funding, promotion, or advocacy.

Our study leaves room for future work in several areas. First, while scientific citations are, to

some degree, international, the patent and legal datasets we employ are limited to the United States.

Obtaining this data at scale for other jurisdictions can be challenging, but an important extension

of our work will include data from other countries; especially other common law jurisdictions where

judges—like U.S. judges—rely on citations. Second, the location of publications in the CCM is

inferred based on citations, although other possibilities exist. Future work could investigate the

possibility of combining alternative knowledge-space embeddings (e.g., those based on content).

Third, we do not distinguish between types of citations although citations can be made to, for

instance, either support or disagree with the target publication [1]. Although we are excited by

the fact that this additional information is not needed to create a robust model, adding hidden

citations [26, 41] and distinguishing between positive and negative citations would be valuable

extensions. Relatedly, our work could be extended by considering important qualitative aspects

of citation decisions such as scientific disagreement or career advancement.

In particular, this

work could shed light on how participants in knowledge systems make citation decisions and the

process of re-discovering older publications. Fourth, we focus on a spherical space for the sake

of simplicity, although this is not necessarily the optimal way to model the knowledge space. One

could alternatively explore different types of geometric space, such as Euclidean space and hyperbolic

space. Specifically, hyperbolic space has the potential to generate diverse network structures with

fewer embedding dimensions, including hierarchical structure, heterogeneous degree distributions,

17



and strong clustering [42]. Finally, our insights related to cumulative citation-based knowledge

systems could be compared to other systems, such as online news, which have been shown to

exhibit different statistical citation patterns [43].

Yet, despite these limitations, we argue that our model provides important new insights into

fundamental mechanisms that shape the web of citations in human knowledge systems. Our re-

sults may also open up new approaches to understanding knowledge systems and incentivizing the

creation of new knowledge across different systems. While science and technology have been well

studied, we contribute by also examining legal citation patterns that have been underexplored, and

we hope this will catalyze more work on the legal system. Law is a critical knowledge system for

society and understanding how the law evolves is important to understanding social changes. Our

model sets the stage for the generalized study of citations across different systems [44] to unveil the

complex scientific, intellectual, and legal ecosystems around e.g., recent technological disruptions.

Moreover, although our focus is on knowledge formalization via citations, our methodology could

be used to delve into the processes of knowledge production itself to understand and forecast the

nuanced dynamics within and across these systems, such as disruption, innovation, and structural

differences between communities in law, science, and technology. Ultimately, we argue that the

production of knowledge is a collective phenomenon, which can only be properly understood by

taking a systematic and holistic approach.

4


## Methods


4.1


## Data Sources


For the legal system data, we use the Case Law Access Project Citation Graph that includes almost

two million U.S. federal judicial opinions published between 1781 and 2019, and 15 million citations

between them.

For scientific system data, we use the SciSciNet data [45] that contains 134, 129, 188 publications

and 1, 588, 739, 703 citations. The SciSciNet data is roughly 18 times larger than the second largest


## dataset (Patent) in our analysis, and we find that it requires substantial time to perform our


analyses. Thus, we reduced the size of the dataset by excluding the publications published after

2016, which results in 58, 299, 343 publications and 973, 266, 138 citations. Additionally, we employ

another science citation dataset, American Physical Society (APS) dataset, for computationally

18



expensive analysis e.g., ablation study.

For the patent system data, we use the dataset from PatentsView containing 7, 430, 873 patents

and 97, 196, 273 citations registered in the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). The patent

citations may not be as complete as what might be expected in the scientific literature [46]. The

reason for this under-citation pattern is that patent filers are incentivized to distinguish their in-

ventions from other work in order to satisfy the legal requirements for patentability (see 35 U.S.

Code § 101-103). Although this bias poses a challenge for other bibliometric research, the different

incentives for inventors make the universal trends observed in Section 2.1 all the more surprising

and underscore that the universal trends are robust against differences between knowledge systems.

4.2

Estimating Exponential Growth

We estimate the annual growth rate, α, of publications, citations, and references (see Fig. 1A and

Fig. 6) by a Poisson model with mean E[ny|y] = exp (αy) , where ny is the number of publications,

citations, or references in year y. The parameter α is obtained by maximizing the log-likelihood

using the scikit-learn package [47].

4.3

Estimating Preferential Attachment and Recency

We use the powerlaw package [48] to perform statistical tests for the power-law degree distribution

and to fit α using log-likelihood. As shown in earlier studies, we confirm that the number of new

citations is proportional to the number of accumulated citations across the three datasets (see

Fig. 1C). For visual clarity, we bin the accumulated citations with bins spaced evenly on a log scale.

The recency bias counteracts preferential attachment and the inflation of citations. Preferential

attachment increases the citations of highly-cited publications, while citation inflation increases the

average number of annual citations, thus increasing the likelihood that a publication recieves new

citations. We control for these two effects which counteract aging to identify the empirical aging

function f emp as follows: First, we control for the effect of preferential attachment by focusing on

the time when a publication j receives x citations. We then calculate the time, ∆tj,x+1, between

publication until the next citation (the (x + 1)-th citation). Second, we control for the effect of

citation inflation by normalizing the total number of citations, Cj,generated in the year of the

19



(x + 1)-th citation for publication j, i.e.,

N

X

f emp(∆t|x) = 1

1

Cj

1 {∆tj,x+1 = ∆t} ,

(6)

R

j=1

where N is the number of publications, and R is a normalization constant to ensure that f emp

∆t f emp(∆t|x).

represents the same probability as in the aging function of the LTCM, i.e., R = P

4.4

Estimating Delayed Recognition

We follow an existing geometric approach to quantify delayed recognition (“sleeping beauties”) [13]:

For a given publication, cy is the number of citations the publication has received in year y. We

rescale the publication’s release year to 0, such that the point (0, c0) denotes the first available point

in the time-citation plane. We denote by ym the year in which the publication receives the maximum

number of citations. Then, we define a linear reference line ly as the straight line that connects

(0, c0) and (ym, cym). The publication’s sleeping beautify coefficient B is subsequently defined as

t=m

X

lt −ct

max(1, ct),

(7)

B =

t=0

which can be interpreted as the area under the curve between the reference line lt and the citation

history line (y, cy)ym

y=0. The larger B, the larger the deviation between the two lines, and hence

the more suddenly the maximum citation was achieved. A coefficient of B = 0 corresponds to

gradual linear citation growth. Situations where B is negative present the opposite: publications

that initially attract a lot of attention and subsequently phase out. We calculate B in units of years

and find a remarkably similar distribution across all three knowledge systems (Fig. 1E).

4.5

Fitting the CCM

We fit the CCM using a two-step process. In the first step, we estimate parameters that determine

the citation probabilities θ ≡({uj} , {ηj} , κ) via Eq. (5). In the second step, we estimate the scaling

λ of the publication placement process via Eq. (4) while keeping θ fixed.

In the first step, we estimate the parameters θ = ({uj} , {ηj} , κ) from Eq. (5) given the publica-

tions’ citation histories. Maximizing the likelihood via gradient ascent is computationally infeasible

because the normalization constant Z(tj) requires summation across all publications. We thus use

20



Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) [49, 50]. The key idea underlying NCE is that it creates an

easy-to-maximize surrogate function that has a maximum at the same parameter value as the origi-

nal log-likelihood function of interest (see Appendix F for details). We used NCE to simultaneously

estimate the parameters, θ = ({uj} , {ηj} , κ). While we set the embedding dimension K to 128, we

note that qualitatively similar results are obtained with different values for K so long as K is not

too small (K ⩾64; see SI Appendix H.1).

In the second step, we estimate the scaling factor λ that governs the distribution of publications

in the embedding space, while keeping the previously estimated θ—which governs citations between

publications—fixed. The probability that a new publication published in year t finds its place at

location u is given by

P(u | {uj; tj < t}, λ) = 1

X

j, tj<ti

P(u | uj),

(8)

Nt

where Nt is the number of existing publications that are citable for publication u. Equation (8) is a

mixture of von Mises distributions, each centered on a previous publication in the embedding space.

We employ the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm to fit the mixture model to estimate λ.

Specifically, we fit the mixture model by maximizing the log-likelihood given by





N

X

N

X

1

X

J :=

i=1

log P(ui | {uj; tj < ti}, λ) =

i=1

log

j, tj<ti

P(ui | uj)

.

(9)

Nti

Maximizing J is a non-trivial task because the log of a summation is not concave [51]. As commonly

done in EM algorithms, we thus introduce a latent variable qij representing the probability that

publication i is drawn from the von Mises distribution centered at j, where P

j qij = 1 for all i.

Then, we rewrite Eq. (9) as





#



"

1

Nti P(ui | uj)

1

Nti P(ui | uj)

N

X

N

X

X

X

=

i=1

log

j, tj<ti

Eqij

,

(10)

J =

i=1

log

j, tj<ti

qij

qij

qij

where Eqij[·] represents the weighted average over j, with weights {qij}j. By using Jensen’s inequality

21



(i.e., log E[h(x)] ≥E[log h(x)] for a concave function h), we obtain

1

Nti P(ui | uj)

N

X

J ≥J′ =

X

qij

.

(11)

j, tj<ti

qij log

i=1

Equation (11) suggests that J can be maximized by maximizing J′ which does not involve the log of

the summation. Maximizing J′ is a constrained maximization problem under constraint P

j qij = 1

for all i. The Lagrangian function L for this constrained maximization problem is given by

1

Nti P(ui | uj)

X

!

N

X

X

qij

+

X

L :=

j, tj<ti

qij log

i

αi

,

(12)

j

qij −1

i=1

where αi is the Lagrange multiplier. By solving ∂L/∂qij = 0, we have

1

Nti P(ui | uj)

qij

−1 + αi = 0 ⇐⇒qij =

1

Nti

P(ui | uj) exp(αi −1).

(13)

log

Because P

j qij = 1, we have

qij =

P(ui | uj)

P

ℓP(ui | uℓ).

(14)

Let us consider optimizing the other parameter, λ, using a gradient descent algorithm. The

gradient is given by

∂L

j, tj<ti

qij

∂

∂λ [log P(ui | uj)] .

(15)

∂λ =

X

X

i

Computing this derivative is challenging because the von Mises distribution, P(ui | uj), involves

the analytically intractable normalization constant that contains λ. To circumvent this problem,

we take advantage of the relationship between von Mises distributions and Gaussian distributions.

Namely, a Gaussian distribution on a K-dimensional space centered at u with variance λ−1I is given

by

N(x | u, λ−1) =

 λ

 K

2

exp



−λ

2(x −u)⊤(x −u)



.

(16)

2π

22



By expanding the square term, we obtain

N(x | u, λ−1) =

 λ

 K

2

exp



−λ

2u⊤u



· exp



λx⊤u



.

(17)

2x⊤x −λ

2π

Note that u⊤u is constant since the vector length is fixed.

If random vector x has a similar

vector length, Eq. (17) can be well approximated by the von Mises distribution with d(u, x) =

1 −u⊤x. This assumption holds mostly true for high-dimensional vectors because (i) the vector

length follows a χ2-distribution, (ii) the standard deviation of the vector length scales with

√

2K

while the mean scales with K, and thus, (iii) the relative variation of the vector length to its mean,

limK→∞

√

2K/K →0, i.e., the vectors generated by a Gaussian distribution have almost the same

length relative to their mean. This approximation enables us to obtain a closed-form expression

∂

∂λ [log P(ui | uj)] ≃K

2λ −(1 −ui

⊤uj).

(18)

Based on Eqs. (14) and (18), we now define our EM algorithm. The EM algorithm updates qij

and λ by maximizing J′(λ, {qij}, {ui}) with respect to either qij and λ while fixing the other. The

maximization can be done analytically for qij by solving ∂J′(λ, {qij}, {ui})/∂qij = 0. Furthermore,

the maximization with respect to λ can be achieved by solving ∂J′(λ, {qij}, {ui})/∂λ = 0. This


## results in the following recursive updating rules:


q(ℓ+1)

ij

=

exp[−λ(ℓ)d(ui, vj)]

P

j′, tj′≤t exp[−λ(ℓ)d(ui, v′

j)],

(19)

 K

2λ(ℓ) −d(ui, uj)



,

(20)

λ(ℓ+1) = λ(ℓ) + ϵ

X

j,tj<ti

q(ℓ+1)

ij

X

i

where ϵ is a learning rate. We determine the learning rate ϵ by using the adaptive moment estimation

(ADAM), with hyperparameters set to those in the original paper [52].

4.6

Predicting Citation Trajectories

We predict future citations by using publications’ initial citation history.

More specifically, we

train the CCM with all citations from publications published up to time ttrain. Then, we generate

the network for t > ttrain in the following two steps. First, we generate the locations of the new

publications according to Eq. (4). Note that we do not provide citations to publications at this

23



time. We determine the number of new publications and the number of references for each new

publication based on the actual number of publications and references in the original networks.

Furthermore, we assign the fitness value of a new publication by randomly sampling a fitness value

of the publications in the training data.

Second, we generate the citations from the new publications according to Eq. (5) based on the

generated publication embeddings. This often involves the computation of the citation probability

between every new publication and millions of existing publications, which is computationally ex-

pensive. While there are heuristics to accelerate sampling at the expense of accuracy, we find that

exact sampling yields the best citation prediction. Thus, we compute the exact probabilities of cita-

tions from each new publication to every existing publications. We employ the Efraimidis-Spirakis

algorithm [53] to perform the sampling without replacement.

4.7

Long-Term Citation Model

We fit the LTCM based on maximum likelihood estimation [35]. We use the ADAM gradient descent

algorithm [52] to maximize the likelihood of the LTCM with respect to (ηj, µj, σj) in Eq. (1) for

individual paper j. The LTCM produces a sequence of citation events for individual publications

but does not produce the citation network. Thus, we construct the citation network as follows:

First, we compute the expected number of citation events for individual papers based on Eq. (8)

in Ref. [35]. The computed number of citation events are real values, and we round them to the

nearest integer. For each citation event, we add an edge from the publication to a randomly selected

publication that is published at the time of citation, thus generating a citation network.

4.8


## Data Availability Statement


Three datasets were used in this study. The USPTO data and U.S. Common Law Data are both

available via FigShare https://figshare.com/projects/Uncovering_the_universal_dynamics_

of_citation_systems_From_science_of_science_to_law_of_law_and_patterns_of_patents/


## 202335. The SciSciNet data can be obtained from https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.


6076908.v1, and the code to process this data is available in our code repository.

24



4.9

Code Availability Statement

The code to reproduce the results is available at https://github.com/skojaku/community_citation_

model.


## References


[1] Henry G. Small. Cited Documents as Concept Symbols. 8(3):327–340.

[2] Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts. Princeton university

press, 2013.

[3] Derek John de Solla Price. A general theory of bibliometric and other cumulative advantage processes. Journal

of the American society for Information science, 27(5):292–306, 1976.

[4] Eugene Garfield. Citation indexes for science: A new dimension in documentation through association of ideas.

Science, 122(3159):108–111, 1955.

[5] Derek John de Solla Price. Networks of scientific papers: The pattern of bibliographic references indicates the

nature of the scientific research front. Science, 149(3683):510–515, 1965.

[6] Fred R Shapiro. Origins of bibliometrics, citation indexing, and citation analysis: The neglected legal literature.

Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 43(5):337–339, 1992.

[7] Derek John de Solla Price. Little science, big science. Columbia University Press, 1963.

[8] Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi and R´eka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439):509–512,

1999.

[9] Cristian Candia, C Jara-Figueroa, Carlos Rodriguez-Sickert, Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi, and C´esar A Hidalgo. The

universal decay of collective memory and attention. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(1):82–91, 2019.

[10] Cristian Candia and Brian Uzzi. The rising of collective forgetting and cultural selectivity in inventors and

physicists communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06592, 2020.

[11] Filippo Radicchi, Santo Fortunato, and Claudio Castellano. Universality of citation distributions: toward an

objective measure of scientific impact. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(45):17268–17272,

November 2008.

[12] Staˇsa Milojevi´c. Quantifying the cognitive extent of science. Journal of Informetrics, 9(4):962–973, 2015.

[13] Qing Ke, Emilio Ferrara, Filippo Radicchi, and Alessandro Flammini. Defining and identifying sleeping beauties

in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(24):7426–7431, 2015.

[14] Santo Fortunato, Carl T Bergstrom, Katy B¨orner, James A Evans, Dirk Helbing, Staˇsa Milojevi´c, Alexander M

Petersen, Filippo Radicchi, Roberta Sinatra, Brian Uzzi, et al. Science of science. Science, 359(6379), 2018.

[15] Dashun Wang, Chaoming Song, and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. Quantifying long-term scientific impact. Science,

342(6154):127–132, 2013.

[16] Roberta Sinatra, Dashun Wang, Pierre Deville, Chaoming Song, and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. Quantifying the

evolution of individual scientific impact. Science, 354(6312):aaf5239, 2016.

25



[17] Eugene Garfield. Breaking the subject index barrier: A citation index for chemical patents. Journal of the

Patent Office Society, 39(5):583, 1957.

[18] Henry Small. Co-citation in the scientific literature: A new measure of the relationship between two documents.

Journal of the American Society for information Science, 24(4):265–269, 1973.

[19] Henry Small, Ernest Sweeney, and Edward Greenlee. Clustering the science citation index using co-citations.

ii. mapping science. Scientometrics, 8:321–340, 1985.

[20] Maxwell Mirton Kessler. Bibliographic coupling between scientific papers. American documentation, 14(1):10–

25, 1963.

[21] Simone Teufel. Argumentative Zoning: Information Extraction from Scientific Text. PhD thesis, University of

Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK, 1999.

[22] Robert K Merton. The sociology of science: Theoretical and empirical investigations. The University of Chicago,

1973.

[23] Anthony FJ Van Raan. Sleeping beauties in science. Scientometrics, 59:467–472, 2004.

[24] Gunther S Stent. Prematurity and uniqueness in scientific discovery. Scientific American, 227(6):84–93, 1972.

[25] Harriet Zuckerman and Roberta Miller. Indicators of science: Notes and queries. Scientometrics, 2(5-6):347–353,

1980.

[26] Robert King Merton. Social theory and social structure. Simon and Schuster, 1968.

[27] Jabeur Fathally, Nicola Mariani, Louis Perret, and Alain-Fran¸cois Bisson.

Les syst`emes juridiques dans le

monde. Collection Bleue. Wilson & Lafleur, 2 edition, 2009.

[28] Michael Park, Erin Leahey, and Russell J Funk. Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time.

Nature, 613(7942):138–144, 2023.

[29] Russell J Funk and Jason Owen-Smith. A dynamic network measure of technological change. Management

Science, 63(3):791–817, 2017.

[30] Matt Marx and Aaron Fuegi. Reliance on science: Worldwide front-page patent citations to scientific articles.

Strategic Management Journal, 41(9):1572–1594, 2020.

[31] Benjamin F Jones. The burden of knowledge and the “death of the renaissance man”: Is innovation getting

harder? The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1):283–317, 2009.

[32] Pavel L Krapivsky and Sidney Redner. Network growth by copying. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear,

and Soft Matter Physics, 71(3):036118, 2005.

[33] Mat´uˇs Medo, Giulio Cimini, and Stanislao Gualdi. Temporal effects in the growth of networks. Physical Review

Letters, 107(23):238701, December 2011.

[34] Qing Ke. Qualifying exam report: On the universal rescaled citation dynamics of individual papers. Indiana

University, pages 1–13, 2015.

[35] Huawei Shen, Dashun Wang, Chaoming Song, and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. Modeling and predicting popularity

dynamics via reinforced poisson processes. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 28(1),

Jun. 2014.

[36] Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. The formula: The universal laws of success. Little Brown and Company, 2018.

26



[37] S Upham and Henry Small. Emerging research fronts in science and technology: patterns of new knowledge

development. Scientometrics, 83(1):15–38, 2010.

[38] Kevin W Boyack, Richard Klavans, and Katy B¨orner.

Mapping the backbone of science.

Scientometrics,

64(3):351–374, 2005.

[39] Katy B¨orner, Chaomei Chen, and Kevin W Boyack. Visualizing knowledge domains. Annual review of infor-

mation science and technology, 37(1):179–255, 2003.

[40] Henry Etzkowitz and Loet Leydesdorff. The dynamics of innovation: from national systems and “mode 2” to a

triple helix of university–industry–government relations. Research policy, 29(2):109–123, 2000.

[41] Xiangyi Meng, Onur Varol, and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. Hidden citations obscure true impact in science. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2310.16181, 2023.

[42] Marian Boguna, Ivan Bonamassa, Manlio De Domenico, Shlomo Havlin, Dmitri Krioukov, and M ´Angeles

Serrano. Network geometry. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(2):114–135, 2021.

[43] Mat´uˇs Medo, Manuel S Mariani, and Linyuan L¨u. The simple regularities in the dynamics of online news impact.

Journal of computational social science, pages 1–18, 2022.

[44] Mohammad Ahmadpoor and Benjamin F Jones. The dual frontier: Patented inventions and prior scientific

advance. Science, 357(6351):583–587, 2017.

[45] Zihang Lin, Yian Yin, Lu Liu, and Dashun Wang. Sciscinet: A large-scale open data lake for the science of

science research. Scientific Data, 10(1):315, 2023.

[46] Bhaven N Sampat. When do applicants search for prior art? The Journal of Law and Economics, 53(2):399–416,

2010.

[47] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,

R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay.

Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.

[48] Jeff Alstott, Ed Bullmore, and Dietmar Plenz. Powerlaw: a python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distri-

butions. PLoS One, 9(1):e85777, January 2014.

[49] Chris Dyer. Notes on noise contrastive estimation and negative sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8251, 2014.

[50] Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyv¨arinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle for unnor-

malized statistical models. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 297–304,

2010.

[51] Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning, volume 4. Springer,

2006.

[52] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. ICLR 2017, 2014.

[53] Pavlos S Efraimidis and Paul G Spirakis. Weighted random sampling with a reservoir. Information Processing

Letters, 97(5):181–185, 2006.

[54] Keenan D Kmiec. The origin and current meanings of judicial activism. California Law Review, 92:1441, 2004.

27



Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Staˇsa Milojevi´c, Dr. Alessandro Flammini, Dr. Filippo Menczer, and Dr. Dashun

Wang for their helpful feedback. S.K. and Y.Y.A. are supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific

Research under award number FA9550-19-1-0391. Y.Y.A. is in part supported by National Science

Foundation under Grant No. 2404109. S.K. and Y.Y.A. acknowledge the computing resources at

Indiana University and thank NVIDIA Corporation for their GPU resources. E.M. acknowledges

support by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2218748.

Author Contributions

R.M and Y.Y.A. conceived the project.

S.K, R.M., and Y.Y.A. designed the analysis and the

model with contributions from S.L., E.M., and A.P. S.K. led the technical implementation with

contributions from all authors. All authors discussed the results. R.M., S.K., S.L., and Y.Y.A.

wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.

Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

28



Supplementary Information

Uncovering the universal dynamics of citation systems: From science of

science to law of law and patterns of patents

A

U.S. Common Law in a Nutshell

Broadly speaking, the U.S. federal judiciary consists of 94 district courts, 13 appellate courts and the

U.S. supreme court1. These courts are organized into 12 regional circuits, each of which consists of

an appellate court and a set of district courts. All federal judges are appointed by a U.S. President,

confirmed by the Senate, and serve a lifetime term (removal is possible only under exceptional

circumstances). All these courts are governed by the fundamental principle that judges are bound

by precedent, a doctrine known as stare decisis (SD) which operates on two levels: vertically and

horizontally. Vertical stare decisis (VSD) refers to the principle that a lower court is bound by

precedent from a higher court, e.g., all federal appellate courts are bound by precedent from the

U.S. Supreme Court. Horizontal stare decisis (HSD) refers to the principle that a court is bound by

its own decisions, e.g., a given appellate court should respect its own prior decisions. While a lower

court cannot generally ignore VSD, under certain circumstances a court may depart from HSD,

although judges tend to distinguish a given case from precedent rather than violating SD [54]. The


## discussion above focuses on binding precedent, which must be followed, however, U.S. courts may


also consider persuasive precedent, which is not legally binding, such as opinions from lower courts,

dissenting opinions, or decisions from other jurisdictions.

U.S judges are generalists, in contrast to scientists and inventors, are and they must rule on

whatever cases are brought before them as a result of human processes which they cannot con-

trol. Judges are generally assigned cases at random and do not usually specialize (although some

judges may become specialists by virtue of regional differences that affect the composition of their

caseloads). Despite the unique common law rules that govern judicial citations, we find that judicial

citations obey remarkably similar dynamics as scientific citations.

1There are several other specialized courts which will not be examined here.

29



B

Comparing Knowledge Systems

Mechanism

Procedure

Law

Science

Patents

Filtering

Participation

Crite-

ria

Anyone

in

principle,

Training normally re-

quired

Freedom

Choice of Subject

Randomly assigned

Authors

specialized,

driven

by

personal

interest

Licensed as attorney,

appointed by President

Anyone

in

principle,

Training normally re-

quired

Inventors

specialized,

driven by personal and

commercial interest

Freedom

Collaboration

Rare

Common

Common

Freedom


## Method of inquiry


Legal research, Adver-

sarial system

Often

experimental


## method,


hypothesis

driven, measurement

Freedom

Time frame

Fast

Variable

Slow

Freedom

Investment/Funding

requirements

Experimental method,

hypothesis

driven,

measurement

Low

investment

(for

the author!)

Medium to high invest-

ment

High investment

Filtering

Publication process

Unilateral

Peer Review

USPTO

Other

Discovery process

LexisNexis,

Westlaw

and

other

legal

re-

search platforms

Patent

research

plat-

forms

and

scientific

repositories,

but may

choose not to cite

Other

Use of assistants

High: Clerks

High: RAs

Varies

Other

Hierarchy

Binding and strict

Loose

May strategically avoid

citing

the

most

suc-

cessful existing patents

(“inverted hierarchy”)

Other

Number of authors

Low

High

Medium

Other

Growth of number of

authors

Google

Scholar

and

other scientific reposi-

tories

Constant

High

High

Other

Importance of geog-

raphy

High (law varies from

place to place)

Low (Science is similar

everywhere)

Medium

(patent

granted

in

specific

places)

C

Sleeping Beauties

Sleeping Beauties are publications that initially receive very few citations, but experience a sudden

burst of citations after some time, often as the result of a re-discovery of a body of knowledge. Here,

we present three representative examples for Sleeping Beauties from law, science, and patents.

In law, an example for a Sleeping Beauty is United States v. Hooton, 693 F.2d 857 (1982).

The case involves an appeal to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The court characterizes the

appellant’s appeal as insubstantial and dismisses it. After the opinion is published in 1982, it is

cited only 11 times in the subsequent 20 years. In 2002, the Ninth Circuit cites Hooton to dismiss

an appeal stating that “the question raised in this appeal is so insubstantial [...] as not to require

further argument.” Following this rediscovery, Hooton receives over 1,000 citations in a span of five

30



years, and serves as a basis by which to dismiss an “insubstantial” appeal with a very short opinion.

In science, a striking example of a Sleeping Beauty is the 1935 article published by Albert Ein-

stein, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen. The paper, titled “Can quantum-mechanical description

of physical reality be considered complete?” received little attention for almost 70 years before

experiencing a surge of citations [13, 25].

In patents, we identify “Thermal deferred action battery” (US 3972734A) as an example of a

prototypical Sleeping Beauty: the patent was granted in 1976 but virtually uncited until around

2019, well after its expiration. Notably, most of the patent’s citations comes from just two com-

panies, Ethicon LLC and Cilag Gmbh International, both of which belong to Johnson & Johnson.

It appears likely that both the way research is conducted by companies and commercial incentives

influence citation behaviors in patents. It is all the more interesting to find examples of Sleeping

Beauties in patents that are similar to those in law and science.

D

Citation patterns for APS citation network

Figure 5 shows the characteristics of citations for the APS dataset. We observe the same quali-

tative results as for other systems, including preferential attachment, aging, and sleeping beauty

publications.

E

Growth in Citations and References

E.1

The growth of the citations and references

A common characteristics of the three citations systems is the growth in citations (Fig. 6). We

observed that the number of citations, as well as the number of references per paper increases

rapidly for the three citation systems.

While the growth in the average number of references appears to be exponential growth, a

previous study [32] demonstrated that it grows logarithmically. We observe that the number of


## references per publication is in fact better characterized by exponential growth. Specifically, we fit


a logarithmic curve of the number yr(t) of references per publication as a function of the cumulative

number n(t) of publications up to each year, to be in line with the previous study [32], i.e., yr(t) =

log(an(t) + b), where a and b are the parameters estimated by minimizing the mean squared error.

31



32

G

D

A

Survival probability

Number of papers

Number of citations

Number of references

Probability mass

Number of new citations

Proportion of citations

APS

Sleeping beauty

coeﬃcient, B + 13

Degree

E

B

Year

Accumulated citations

Year

F

C

Year

Age

Figure 5: Dynamics of the APS citation network. A. Growth of publications. B. Growth of cita-

tions. C. Growth of the average number of references. D. Degree distribution. E. Linear preferential

attachment. F. Aging function. G. Skewed distribution of the Sleeping Beauty coefficient.



33

A

Number of citations

Number of references

Law

Science

Patent

Year

B

Year

Figure 6: The number of citations and the average number of references per paper over time.

Law

APS

Patent

Figure 7: The exponential and logarithmic curve fit for the average number of references per paper.

The solid and dashed line represent the exponential and logarithmic curves, respectively.



We also fit an exponential curve as a function of the time using the Poisson model (See Section 4.2).

Then, we computed the fitting error by the mean squared errors (MSE) for these curves.

We

observed that the exponential curve has lower MSE than the logarithmic curve for the APS, law,

and patent citation networks (Fig. 7).

E.2

Citation radius

By construction, publication-centric baseline models such as the PAM and LTCM cannot account for

the exponential growth of references, as they assume a fixed number of m citations per publication.

Within the CCM framework, cited publications (i.e., references) are expected to be thematically

adjacent to the citing publication’s topic. In the embedding space, references are therefore, on

average, within some small radius of the citing publication’s position, where the radius is the average

cosine distance between a focal paper and its references.

From this perspective, there are two

potential explanations for the increasing number of references over time. Either the average radius

of citation has grown over time, driven, for instance, by increasingly interdisciplinary publications

that necessitate broader references. Alternatively, the average radius of citation has either remained

constant or decreased over time, while publications tend to appear in denser areas of the knowledge

space, resulting in a growing number of publications available for citation in the vicinity of new

publications. In APS and patent citation networks, we find that the radius of citation—defined

by the average distance between a publication and its references—has decreased, suggesting that

specialization is increasing (see Fig. 8).

In contrast, we find that the radius of citation in the

legal system has remained relatively constant over time. While increased specialization has been

documented in science and patents [31], it is notable that it does not seem to be as important in

law. This may be related to the fact that U.S. judges remain generalists.

F

Noise contrastive estimation

We fit the CCM using the noise contrastive estimation (NCE) [49, 50]. NCE is a generic algorithm

for fitting an exponential model

P(x; θ) = exp(r(x; θ))

Z

,

(21)

34



A

B

C

Citation radius (cosine distance)

Year

Figure 8:

The shrinking radius of citation.

(A) Law.

(B) APS. (C) Patents.

The radius of


## references is the average cosine distance from individual publication and its references. “PA” refers


to the reference radius for the CCM fitted on the network generated by the preferential attachment.

where x is a data sample, and r(x; θ) is a real-valued function parameterized by θ. NCE aims to

identify the maximum likelihood estimate θ∗of the model without calculating the computationally-

expensive Z. The key idea underlying NCE is to optimize another computationally cheaper function

that has the same global maximum at θ∗. More specifically, NCE fits the parameter θ by discrim-

inating a data sample x and another “random” data x′ sampled from an arbitrary distribution P0

using a logistic regression model

g(x) :=

1

1 + exp (−r(x; θ) + ln P0(x) + b),

(22)

where b is an intercept that is learned jointly with parameter θ. NCE trains the logistic regression

model by maximizing the log-likelihood

x∈X

log g(x) −

X

X

x′∈X ′

log(1 −g(x′)),

(23)

where X and X ′ are the sets of the given data samples and random data samples generated from

P0, respectively. Notably, Eq. (23) has a global maximum at MLE θ∗asymptotically [50]. In other

words, the maximization of it provides asymptotically unbiased estimates of Eq. (21) [50].

To train the CCM, we form x by a pair of publications x = (i, j) connected by citations from i to

j. Then, we generate a random data point x′ = (i, j′), where we randomly sample a publication j′

published before i with probability P0((i, j)) ∝cj(ti)+c0. The unnormalized logarithmic probability

35



for the CCM is given by

r((i, j); θ) = log(cj(ti) + c0) + log ηj −κd(ui, uj)

(24)

Then, we train the classifier g(x) given by

g(x) :=

1

1 + exp [−log(cj(ti) + c0) −log ηj + κd(ui, uj) + ln P0((i, j)) + b].

(25)

The intercept b negates the constant terms of r(i, j), i.e., the normalization constant for P0((i, j)),

allowing us to simplify it by

g(x) :=

1

1 + exp [−log ηj + κd(ui, uj) + b].

(26)

To prevent the classifier from overfitting, we regularize it by adding a L2 regularization on κ. Thus,

we maximize the following likelihood function:





+ γ

1

|X|

X

(i,j)∈X

log g(i, j) −

X

(i,j′)∈X ′

log(1 −g(i, j′))

2κ2,

(27)

where γ is the regularization parameter, which we set to 5 × 10−5. We use ADAM [52] with batch

size of 4096 edges, learning rate 10−3, and 120 epochs.

We generate a citation network using the parameters estimated based on the empirical citation

network. The generation process is akin to the preferential attachment, with the probability of

citations given by Eq. (5). In each year t, we add nt new publications, where nt is the number of

publications that appear in year t in the empirical network. Each new publication i has the same

number mi of references as that in the empirical network. Each edge is placed with probability

proportional to Eq. (5). The resulting network has the same number of nodes, edges, and growth

rate as the empirical network.

G

Number of parameters of citation models

In the PAM, LTCM, and CCM, the likelihood of receiving citations is proportional to the total

number of accumulated citations plus an additional offset citation c0, which ensures that newly

36



published publications without any citations have a chance to receive citations. Additionally, the

LTCM has three parameters per publication: fitness (ηj) and aging (µj, σj). This results in 3N

parameters. CCM has K parameters per publication: ηj and the K-dimensional embedding vector

uj. Note that, since the embedding vector is unit length, the effective number of parameters for an

embedding of a publication is K −1. CCM also has scaling parameters (κ and λ). Consequently,

CCM has KN + 2 parameters in total.

H

Robustness of the results

We validated the robustness of the CCM by changing the model’s hyperparameters (c0, K). Overall,

the CCM is robust to the choice of hyperparameters, except for the number of dimensions K of

the embedding space, which must be larger then a minimum threshold (Figs. 9 and 10). We also

explore the effect of aging and fitness by comparing the CCM with and without aging and fitness.

We identify that the current configuration of the CCM is minimal yet sufficient to reproduce the

citation dynamics observed in the three knowledge systems (Fig. 12, 13, 14, and 15). We discuss

these results in detail in the following sections, in each of which we will first show the reproducibility

of the citation dynamics and then show predictability of the citation dynamics. We used the APS


## dataset to examine various configurations of the CCM, except for the validation in Section H.4,


where we assessed performance at different citation percentiles because this validation was feasible

for the SciSciNet dataset.

H.1

Embedding dimension and offset citations

H.1.1

Citation pattern reproducibility

CCM has two hyperparameters, namely the offset citations c0 and the number K of dimension of the

embedding. We test if three citation patterns—preferential attachment, recency, and heterogeneous

SB distribution—are reproduced for different values of c0 and K. First, the CCM reproduces the

three citation patterns qualitatively similarly to the empirical ones for different values of c0 (Fig. 9).

Second, while the number K of dimensions does not strongly affect preferential attachment, differ-

ent dimensions can produce substantially different recency biases and SB distributions (Fig. 10).

Specifically, the recency bias is reproduced only if the embedding space is sufficiently high dimen-

sional, likely because communities cannot drift away from the publications in a low-dimensional

37



38

Law

Patent

APS

A

B

C

Figure 9: Citation patterns for the networks generated by the CCM with different values of c0.



39

Law

Patent

APS

A

B

C

Figure 10: Citation patterns for the networks generated by the CCM with different values of K.



embedding space. For low-dimensional embedding spaces (K ≤16), the sleeping beauty distri-

butions have a substantial margin to the empirical network, while the margin is closed for higher

dimensional embedding spaces (K ≥64). In summary, the CCM is robust to the choice of c0 and

K, provided that K is larger than a minimum threshold.

H.1.2

Citation predictability

The CCM is a rich citation model compared to other existing models. Thus, it is possible that the

high predictability results from the richness of the citation model. We test a smaller CCM with the

same order of parameters as the LTCM and compare their prediction performances.

Figure 11 shows the prediction performance of the CCM model for different values of K. Overall,

a higher dimension K yields a better prediction performance, in terms of predicting both the citation

count and highly-cited publications. We note that a smaller K sometimes yields a better prediction

performance; for example, the CCM with K = 16 dimensional space yields the lowest prediction

error (Figs. 11A and B). This result implies that, when K is excessively large, CCM may suffer

from overfitting to the training data, thereby undermining its ability to accurately predict unseen

test data. Therefore, it is not always the case that a richer model always yields better predictions.

We compare the CCM with K = 3 to the LTCM, which has approximately the same number of

parameters. The LTCM predicts the citations better than the small CCM for the first ten years from

the publications but worse in the long-term (10< years) for science and patent citations (Figs. 11A

and B). While the CCM with K = 3 does not accurately predict the citation counts, it does a good

job at predicting which publications will be highly cited (Fig. 11C).

H.2

Aging

H.2.1

Citation pattern reproducibility

The CCM does not include the aging factor (i.e., f(ti −tj ; µj, σj)), which we identified to be an

unnecessary component. Furthermore, we find that including the aging factor in the CCM results

in a noticeable decrease in the number of sleeping beauties.

We define the CCM with aging as follows:

PCCMa(j | i; ui, uj) =

1

Z(tj) (cj + c0) ηjf(ti −tj ; µ, σ) exp (−κd(ui, uj)) ,

(28)

40



41

Errors in predicting citations

|log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|

A

Law

APS

Patent

Error in predicting citations for the top 10%  highly-cited papers

B

CCM

(Dimension)

Average precision for the top 10% highly-cited papers

C

Figure 11: Prediction of citations for different embeddings dimensions K.



where we use the same aging function f (i.e., the log-normal distribution) as for the LTCM with

parameters µ and σ being equal across all publications. The CCM with the aging factor qualitatively

reproduces preferential attachment and recency patterns, but it produces fewer sleeping beauties,

especially in the patent citation network (Fig. 12).

H.2.2

Citation predictability

We find that the inclusion of the aging factor can slightly enhance the citation predictability of the

CCM, especially the citations of young publications (Fig. 13). This suggests that considering the

temporal dynamics of citation can improve the model’s ability to predict future citations.

H.3

Fitness

H.3.1

Citation pattern reproducibility

We define the CCM without the fitness factor as follows:

PCCMw(j | i; ui, uj) =

1

Z(tj) (cj + c0) exp (−κd(ui, uj)) ,

(29)

where we omit the fitness parameter ηj from the original CCM (Eq. (5)).

The CCM without

the fitness factor qualitatively reproduced all the citation characteristics of the empirical networks,

including preferential attachment, recency, and a heterogeneous SB coefficient distribution (Fig. 14).

H.3.2

Citation predictability

When it comes to predicting citations, the CCM without a fitness factor significantly underperforms

the CCM with the fitness factor, and performs worse than the LTCM for the legal citation networks

(Fig. 15).

H.4

Different percentile of the highly-cited papers

We test the citation models by focusing on the top-5% most highly cited publications (Fig. 16). As

for the top-10% highly-cited papers, the CCM outperforms the LTCM for the top-5% highly-cited

papers.

42



43

Law

Patent

APS

A

Number of new citations

Proportion of citations

Survival probability

Accumulated citations

B

Age

C

Age

Sleeping beauty coeﬃcient, B + 13

Figure 12: Citation patterns for the networks generated by the CCM with the aging factor given

by Eq. (28).



44

Errors in predicting citations

|log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|

A

Law

APS

Patent

Error in predicting citations for the top 10%  highly-cited papers

B

Average precision for the top 10% highly-cited papers

C

Figure 13: Prediction of citations for the publications published in 2000 by the CCM with the aging

factor given by Eq. (28).



45

Law

Patent

APS

A

Number of new citations

Proportion of citations

Survival probability

Accumulated citations

B

Age

C

Age

Sleeping beauty coeﬃcient, B + 13

Figure 14: Citation patterns for the networks by the CCM without the fitness factor given by

Eq. (29).



46

Errors in predicting citations

|log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|

A

Law

APS

Patent

Error in predicting citations for the top 10%  highly-cited papers

B

Average precision for the top 10% highly-cited papers

C

Figure 15: Prediction of citations for publications published in 2000 by the CCM without fitness

factor given by Eq. (29).



47

Error in predicting citations for the top 5%  highly-cited papers

A

Law

Patent

Science

Average precision for the top 5% highly-cited papers

B

Figure 16: Predictions for the top-5% highly cited publications.



H.5

Different cohorts of publications for predictions

We test the citation models by using different cohorts of publications for predictions. Specifically,

we focus on publication published in 1990, with five years of citation data for the models to learn

from. We find qualitatively similar results as reported for publications published in 2000 (Fig. 17).

48



49

Errors in predicting citations

|log(c(t) + 1) −log(ˆc(t) + 1)|

A

Law

APS

Patent

Error in predicting citations for the top 10%  highly-cited papers

B

Average precision for the top 10% highly-cited papers

C

Figure 17: Prediction for the publications published in 1990.