Is OpenAlex Suitable for Research Quality Evaluation and Which

Citation Indicator is Best?

Mike Thelwall

Information School, University of Sheffield, UK. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6065-205X

m.a.thelwall@sheffield.ac.uk

Xiaorui Jiang

Information School, University of Sheffield, UK. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4255-5445



This article compares (1) citation analysis with OpenAlex and Scopus, testing their citation

counts, document type/coverage and subject classifications and (2) three citation-based

indicators: raw counts, (field and year) Normalised Citation Scores (NCS) and Normalised Log-

transformed Citation Scores (NLCS). Methods (1&2): The indicators calculated from 28.6

million articles were compared through 8,704 correlations on two gold standards for 97,816

UK Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2021 articles. The primary gold standard is ChatGPT

scores, and the secondary is the average REF2021 expert review score for the department

submitting the article. Results: (1) OpenAlex provides better citation counts than Scopus and

its inclusive document classification/scope does not seem to cause substantial field

normalisation problems. The broadest OpenAlex classification scheme provides the best

indicators. (2) Counterintuitively, raw citation counts are at least as good as nearly all field

normalised indicators, and better for single years, and NCS is better than NLCS. (1&2) There

are substantial field differences. Thus, (1) OpenAlex is suitable for citation analysis in most

fields and (2) the major citation-based indicators seem to work counterintuitively compared

to quality judgements. Field normalisation seems ineffective because more cited fields tend

to produce higher quality work, affecting interdisciplinary research or within-field topic

differences.

Keywords: Research evaluation, OpenAlex, Scientometrics, Bibliometrics, Citation analysis


## Introduction


Citation-based indicators are widely used to support research evaluations of individuals,

departments, universities and countries (De Bellis, 2009; Moed, 2006). This article

investigates two separate issues with the same data: whether OpenAlex is a suitable database

for citation analysis, and which is the best citation-based indicator.

OpenAlex

Whilst citation analysts in the Global North have typically had to purchase licences to access

the Scopus, Dimensions.ai, or Web of Science citation indexes, OpenAlex offers the same type

of data for free and aims to provide greater coverage for the Global South (Priem et al., 2022).

At the time of writing (February 2025) it also provided substantially greater coverage of books.

In theory, this greater coverage should give better citation analysis results, because more data

allows the results to be finer grained. Nevertheless, other factors are important, including

document type classification (to ensure that only similar documents are compared), subject

classifications (to ensure that documents are benchmarked only against others from the same

subject), and citation extraction accuracy and comprehensiveness (because this is a non-

trivial software engineering task). Thus, OpenAlex’s greater coverage does not necessarily

equate to greater utility for research evaluation tasks: this needs to be checked.



Based on previous research OpenAlex’s document coverage is largely an expansion

from Scopus, especially increasing the number of open access journals (Maddi et al., 2024)

and data journals (Jiao et al., 2023) but with problems of metadata accuracy, including many

articles without any indexed references (Alperin et al., 2024). OpenAlex’s coverage of


## references is broadly comparable to Scopus and the Web of Science for documents that they


all index, however (Culbert et al., 2024) so its expanded coverage is partly due to indexing

documents without references. A particular problem with OpenAlex seems to be its

classification of editorial contributions as standard journal articles (Haupka et al., 2024),

which influences field normalized citation calculations (see below). It can also struggle to

accurately classify the language of journal articles but seems to have wider coverage of non-

English sources than Scopus (Céspedes et al., 2025).

Citation-based indicators

In parallel with the above OpenAlex motivation, a wide range of citation-based indicators

have been proposed to help assess the impact or quality of journal articles. Whilst raw citation

counts are widely available, it is unfair to compare citation counts between articles of

different ages, because older articles have had longer to be cited. It is also unfair to compare

citation counts between fields because some fields naturally tend to be more cited. Citation

rate differences between two fields can occur because the number of references per article

differs, or because one field tends to cite newer articles or non-article sources (van Raan,

2004; Glänzel et al., 2009; Moed, 2006). Thus, it is common in scientometrics to only compare

citation counts (or citation rates for journals) within the same field and year. When citations

need to be compared between fields and years, then the citation counts are typically

converted into a field and year normalised rate or version. The most common is the

Normalised Citation Score (NCS) (Waltman et al., 2011) or variants. For an article, this is its

citation count divided by the mean citation count of all articles from its field and year. It has

been argued that this is still unfair because the denominator (the field average citation count)

is unduly influenced by the few highly cited articles (e.g., Brzezinski, 2015) and therefore all

citation counts should be transformed to remove the skewing with ln(1+c) before any

calculations are performed (Thelwall, 2017). This gives the Normalised Log-transformed

Citation Score (NLCS). Percentile ranks are an alternative method to NLCS for dealing with

skewed citation counts (Bornmann & Leydesdorff, 2013).

Despite the ostensible logic behind field normalisation, and many descriptive studies

introducing or comparing indicators (e.g., Lundberg, 2007; Purkayastha et al., 2019; Waltman

et al., 2012) or evaluating individual indicators against expert scores (Thelwall et al., 2023a),

almost no study has systematically compared different indicators against a gold standard to

demonstrate which is best or whether field normalisation is necessary. One partial exception

is a small-scale comparison of indicators for 125 cell biology or immunology papers, where

the gold standard was post-publication expert scores from F1000 website. Raw citation

counts had the second highest corelation with expert scores (behind percentile rank in the

subject area) (Bornmann & Leydesdorff, 2013). A larger scale analysis investigated 50,000

biomedical papers from F1000Prime (a newer name for F1000; subsequent names include

Faculty Opinions and H1 Connect), finding that correlations between expert scores and a

range of indicators were similar, but citation counts were not included so the value of field

normalisation was not tested (Bornmann & Marx, 2015). A third partial exception is a study

that shows that average citation counts correlated more strongly with a UK department’s

proportion of “world leading” research than did selected field normalised indicators for



Psychiatry, Clinical Psychology and Neurology (Fazel & Wolf, 2017). Nevertheless, the value

of field normalization is unproven, and the relative merits of its component parts (e.g., the

optimal granularity of the subject classification scheme used) are unknown.



From a wider perspective, citation-based indicators are typically used as either

research quality or impact indicators, with the former seeming to be more accepted. The most

common dimensions of research quality, at least as defined for peer or expert review, are

originality, rigour, and significance (societal and scholarly) (Langfeldt et al., 2020). These three

dimensions are all subjective in the sense that experts might score an article differently with

a high degree of confidence and plausible justifications. Thus, the common practical solution

is to accept the average or consensus of two or more peers or experts (e.g., Milyaeva &

Neyland, 2023).

Subject classification schemes for science are essential for the field normalisation of

indicators and a more accurate subject classification can expect to support better field

normalised indicators. A comparison of classification schemes using long document reference

lists as a gold standard for specialisms found that citation-based document classification

tended to provide better results than journal-based classifications (Klavans & Boyack, 2017).

No previous papers seem to have compared classification schemes by the extent to which the


## results match article-level quality judgements, however, presumably because of the scarcity


of such data on a large scale.

Research questions

The first goal of this paper is to assess whether OpenAlex is a credible platform for research

evaluation indicators by comparing indicators derived from it with indicators derived from

Scopus, an established and widely used citation index. The most likely sources of differences

are (a) coverage of articles, (b) citation extraction accuracy/comprehensiveness, (c) subject/

classificaitons, and (d) document type classification. The second goal is to compare three

alternative citation indicator formulae to identify the best: simple citation counts; NCS; and

NLCS. It is not possible to test all these independently, but this paper will conduct a range of

evaluations and then discuss alternative explanations for the results. The following research

questions underpin this process.

• RQ1: Are OpenAlex citation counts better for research quality indicators than Scopus

citation counts? The apparently greater coverage of OpenAlex may make its citation

counts more useful, although if it covers low quality articles then their citations may

degrade the overall value of citation counts.

• RQ2: Which is the best research quality formula: counts, NCS or NLCS?

• RQ3: Which is the best subject classification scheme: Scopus broad fields

(overlapping), OpenAlex domains, OpenAlex fields, OpenAlex subfields, or OpenAlex

topics?

• RQ4: Does OpenAlex or Scopus have the best classification of the “journal article” type

for field normalisation formulae? OpenAlex has a less fine-grained document type

classification, including editorials alongside full journal articles. It seems likely that this

would compromise the value of indicators calculated from it.

• RQ5: Which is the best overall approach for calculating research quality indicators

from OpenAlex and Scopus?

• RQ6: Are there field differences in the answer to RQ5?




## Methods


The research design was as follows.


## 1. Extract all journal articles from Scopus and OpenAlex for the years 2014-2020. These


years were chosen to match the gold standards (see below).


## 2. Match the articles in Scopus and OpenAlex by DOI to create three sets: articles in


Scopus; articles in OpenAlex; and articles in both (i.e., the intersection of the first two).

Comparing results on the overlapping set will allow questions that do not involve

coverage issues to be directly addressed (RQ1, RQ2, RQ3).


## 3. Calculate NLCS and NCS for all articles with all five classification schemes and on all


three sets. This gives 5x3=15 indicators plus raw citation counts for OpenAlex and

Scopus, giving a total of 32 indicators per article.


## 4. Calculate an article quality gold standard with ChatGPT for REF2021 articles. A


secondary gold standard was calculated from departmental REF2021 average quality

scores.


## 5. Correlate the 32 indicators against ChatGPT quality scores by UoA (Unit of Assessment


– see below for an explanation) to identify the best overall approach and the influence

of the component factors.

We had originally planned to use departmental mean REF2021 scores as the gold standard

but, after analysing the results noticed that the gold standard was age-biased in favour of

older articles. This occurred because higher scoring departments tended to submit a higher

proportion of older articles to the REF. This gave an advantage to indicators that were not

field normalised. Thus, individual article ChatGPT scores were used as an alternative. This has

only a small age bias (Thelwall & Kurt, 2024) and is also preferable because it is direct,

although using non-human “judgement” is a disadvantage.


## Data


The latest OpenAlex snapshot was downloaded on 1 December 2024. From this, documents

of type “article” and with cross-ref type “journal-article” (as recorded in OpenAlex) were

extracted along with their publication year, citation count, primary topic, field, subfield, and

domain.



The metadata for all Scopus documents of type “journal article” and published

between 2014 and 2020 was downloaded between 2 and 16 December 2024 to be

approximately contemporary. The difference of up to 15 days results in a minor advantage

for Scopus given that the most recent article analysed was from 31 December 2020 (a

maximum 1% time difference, favouring Scopus, which does not affect the conclusions since

OpenAlex tended to perform better). The data included publication year, DOI, citation count

and All Science Journal Classification (ASJC) codes for each article (at least one each, but

frequently multiple; these are derived from the publishing journal).



A joint dataset, “Both” was created from the subset of articles with a DOI in Scopus

that were also in OpenAlex with the same DOI. DOIs were converted to lowercase before this

comparison. Articles without DOIs were discarded because they could not be reliably

matched.

Scopus classifications

The Scopus ASJC classification is based on the fields of the publishing journal, as decided by

subject specialist teams at Elsevier. For the 26 non-general broad fields in Scopus, there are



two multi-purpose fields, called “all” and “misc” and the remaining AJSC narrow fields within

the broad field are specialist (e.g., 2734 is Pathology and Forensic Medicine within the broad

field 27 Medicine).



The Scopus AJSC classifications allow multiple classes per article, with 2 and 3 being

common. For the field normalised indicators using the Scopus scheme, articles were assigned

to each of their Scopus classes at full value. Although fractional counting could be used, it

seems likely that the simpler whole counting approach is employed in practice.

OpenAlex classifications

In contrast to Scopus (at least as accessible via its API), OpenAlex classifies articles individually,

not by journal, and assigns them a single “primary” category rather than multiple equal

categories. The OpenAlex data includes DOIs, subject classifications, and citation counts. The

subject classifications include domains, field, subfields and topics. The field is one of 27 in the

All Science Journal Classification (ASJC) list and the subfield is one of 252 from the same list.

The topic is one of 4516 generated by a clustering of the articles. All articles are automatically

assigned to these classifications from information including the “title, abstract, source

(journal) name, and citations” (OpenAlex, 2025). Articles can be given multiple classifications

but only the primary classifications are used here.

• Domains. 4: Life Sciences; Social Sciences; Physical Sciences; Health Sciences.

• Fields. 36. For example: Agricultural and Biological Sciences; Engineering; Health

Professions; Social Sciences.

• Subfields. 252. For example: General Agricultural and Biological Sciences; Classics;

Automotive Engineering; Speech and Hearing.

• Topics. 4516. For example: Tectonic and Geochronological Evolution of Orogens; Land

Tenure and Property Rights in Agriculture; Structure and Agency in Social Theory;

Medicinal Plants and Their Bioactivities.

Gold standards

When assessing the value of an indicator, it is useful to have a “gold standard” in terms of a

set of outputs with “correct” scores to compare the indicator against. This section describes

the two (pseudo) gold standards used.

Secondary: Departmental average research quality scores

Since citation-based indicators are typically used, explicitly or implicitly, as research quality

indicators, the ideal gold standard would be a large collection of journal articles with agreed

quality ratings that have been constructed with minimal citation data input. Since no such

collection exists, a proxy was constructed from available Research Excellence Framework

(REF) 2021 data, forming the secondary gold standard. REF2021 is the latest edition of the

UK’s national research evaluation process, which, amongst other things, involves 1,120

experts scoring 185,594 research outputs for research quality on a four-point scale: 1*

(nationally relevant), 2* (internationally relevant), 3* (internationally excellent), and 4*

(world leading) (2021.ref.ac.uk). The evaluation is primarily based on subjective assessments

of the rigour, originality and significance of the outputs, with citations playing a very minor

supporting role in some fields (Wilsdon et al., 2015).



Although the individual quality scores are confidential and have been destroyed, the

percentage of scores awarded to the outputs of each submitting department are public, as



are the identities of the department’s outputs (results2021.ref.ac.uk). The departmental

mean score was taken as a proxy indicator of the quality of each of a department’s articles

(or the mean of the departmental means for co-authored articles submitted by multiple

departments). This is an indirect indicator but, unless there are systematic departmental

biases, higher correlations with these proxies would associate with higher correlations with

the (unknown) individual article scores, so the proxy is appropriate. One source of bias is if a

department is stronger or weaker in books (or another non-article output type), but we

circumvented this limitation with private access to journal-only departmental REF averages.



To ensure accurate matching, only articles with DOIs in the REF database were

retained, and those with a publication date outside the year range 2014-2020 were removed.

The secondary gold standard therefore consisted of all journal articles from REF2021 officially

published 2014-2020, with a DOI matching both Scopus and OpenAlex (for comparability),

and the REF2021 departmental average quality scores for journal articles.



The REF UoAs were used as a convenient database-agnostic set of field/subject

categories for the correlation tests. This allows field differences to be reported. The REF is

split into 34 broadly field-based UoAs for assessment purposes and these form a classification

scheme that is independent of both Scopus and OpenAlex.

Primary: ChatGPT article research quality scores

ChatGPT research quality scores were obtained for REF2021 articles to form the primary

research quality gold standard. Many previous studies have shown that research quality

scores from ChatGPT correlate positively with expert REF2021 departmental research quality

scores in all fields (Thelwall & Yaghi, 2024; Thelwall et al., 2024) and the same for small-scale

tests of individual article-level quality scores (Thelwall, 2024, 2025). Thus, in the absence of

expert scores for individual REF2021 articles, ChatGPT provides the best available source of

article-level research quality scores.



As shown by previous studies, the optimal method to obtain a useful research quality

score from ChatGPT for an article is to configure it with system instructions from the relevant

REF2021 expert review panel instructions, then submit the title and abstract of the article

rather than its full text (Thelwall, 2025). The REF2021 instructions define research quality in

terms of rigour, originality, and significance, then request an evaluation accompanied by one

of the following scores: 1* nationally relevant; 2* internationally relevant; 3* internationally

excellent; 4* world leading. This procedure was followed for all REF2021 articles without short


## abstracts (excluding the 10% of articles with the shortest abstracts, which included many


short format submissions that are not full journal articles), with a program

(github.com/MikeThelwall/Webometric_Analyst) used to automatically extract the scores

from the reports. Articles with short abstracts were excluded because these are more likely

to be mistakes or shorter document types that are not fully comparable with full articles. As

part of this, all articles without abstracts in Scopus were excluded.

The requests were submitted to ChatGPT 4o-mini (gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18) using its

Applications Programming Interface (API) batch mode, with a separate chat session for each

article score request. Although submitting multiple articles within the same chat session

would save money by uploading the system instructions less often, this reduces the accuracy

of the results (Thelwall, 2024). Each article was submitted five times in five separate non-

consecutive sessions and the mean of the scores used as ChatGPT’s estimate. Although the

median or mode would be statistically better estimates of central tendency, the mean is

preferable because it encodes ChatGPT’s uncertainty about a score. Given that it has a strong



preference for 3*, this uncertainty is the main device that can be used to leverage more fine-

grained information in the underlying model. For example, a mean score of 3.2* indicates a

small degree of uncertainty that 3* could be too low whereas 2.8* indicates a small degree

of uncertainty that 3* is too high. For UoAs in which ChatGPT rarely gives 4* scores, from a

correlation perspective, a 3.2* might be equivalent to a 4* in UoAs where it more frequently

gives a 4* score (i.e., it might be a similarly top ranked score).

Citation rate formulae

As summarised in the introduction, it is unfair to directly compare citation counts with quality

scores because older articles have had more time to attract citations, and different fields

naturally have different citation rates. The standard approach to address both issues is to

divide citation counts by the average citation counts of all articles from the same field and

year, giving a field and year normalised citation count, such as the Normalised Citation Score

(NCS) (Waltman et al., 2011). This is fairer than citation counts, for example because each

article has a score of 1 if it has attracted an exactly average (mean) number of citations for its

field and year. An alternative to this is the Normalised Log-transformed Citation Score (NLCS),

which is the same except that each citation count c is transformed to ln(1+c) before all

calculations. This reduces skewing in the original data and reduces the chance that individual

highly cited articles could have a substantial influence on the results by changing the

denominator of the normalisation calculation (Thelwall, 2017).



These indicators require a field classification system because this affects the choice of

articles for their denominators, so both NCS and NLCS values are likely to change, perhaps

dramatically, if the classification system changes. For this article NCS and NLCS values were

calculated from Scopus, and OpenAlex citation counts, with all four OpenAlex classification

schemes, and the separate Scopus ASJC. This gives multiple potential indicators per article to

correlate against the gold standards.



For OpenAlex, normalised citation indicators were calculated separately with the

OpenAlex 2014-20 set, the Scopus 2014-20 set and the overlapping 2014-20 “Both” set.

Comparing results from these sets should indicate the influence of the main degrees of

variation between the databases.

Correlations

The above process produces a large set of articles with gold standard quality indictors and a

range of citation rate indicators. A simple way to answer the research questions would be to

correlate the gold standard against each of the citation rate indicators and interpret the


## results. This is not ideal, however, since it is known that citations have substantially different


values as research quality indicators, depending on the field. For example, they are relatively

strong in the health, life and physical sciences but are weak in some social sciences and most

arts and humanities (Thelwall et al., 2023a).



Instead of correlating citation-rate indicators against the gold standard overall,

separate correlations restricted to each REF2021 UoA give finer-grained results and

potentially reveal field-specific patterns. For example, perhaps OpenAlex is best for the arts

and humanities (e.g., because of its book coverage) and worst for the health sciences. Using

the REF UoAs seems fine-grained enough to identify major field-related patterns, without

potentially giving a subtle advantage to Scopus or OpenAlex by using one of their classification

schemes. Table 1 reports the main dimensions of variation between databases and the

experiments included to test them.



Table 1. Dimensions of variation between citation indexes and indicators and tests to

compare them. In each case the overall test is correlation against the gold standard quality

scores with the UoA classification scheme.

Dimension

Variation

Experiments (all possible

variations)

Count source

Quality of citation count data,

including the volume and

importance of citations and the

accuracy of citation extraction and

matching.

Citation-based indicators calculated

from Scopus citation counts

compared to the equivalent

calculated from OpenAlex citation

counts.

Formula

Citation-based indicator formula

Citation counts, NLCS, and NLCS

compared.

Norm reference

set

Field normalised citation-based

indicators compared between the

OpenAlex document set, the

overlapping (Both) document set

and the Scopus document set.

Field

classification

scheme


## Database coverage and document


type classification from the

perspective of (the denominators

of) field normalised indicators.

Field classification scheme (both

categories and categorisation)

from the perspective of (the

denominators of) field normalised

indicators.

Field normalised citation-based

indicators compared between

classification schemes used for

their denominators.

Indicator naming convention

Thirty-two indicators were calculated, using all possible combinations of count source,

formula, norm reference set, and subject classification scheme from those discussed above

(Table 1). For convenience, the indicators all have a four-part label using the same notation

(except that the count indicators only need two parts), as follows. Here, OpenAlex is

abbreviated to OAlex to shorten labels.

• Part 1: Count source (OAlex or Scopus). This is the origin of the raw citation count for

the article. For example, an OAlex count means the citation count for the article

recorded in OpenAlex.

• Part 2: Formula (NLCS, NCS, or simple count). This is the mathematical formula (if any)

used to transform a citation count into a field and year normalised variant.

• Part 3: Norm reference set (OAlex, Scopus, or Both). This is the set of articles that the

given article is norm referenced against for the denominator of the NLCS or NCS

calculations). For example, if OAlex is selected then the NLCS and NCS denominators

will consist only of citation counts from OpenAlex (for articles within the same field).

• Part 4: Subject classification scheme (OAlex subfields, OAlex topics, OAlex fields, OAlex

domains, Scopus fields). This is the subject classification scheme used to decide which

papers are in the same field as the given article for the denominator of the NLCS or

NCS calculations. For example, if OAlex subfields is selected then the NLCS and NCS

denominators will only contain articles from the same OpenAlex subfield as the article

in the numerator.

To illustrate the full schema, “OAlex|NLCS|Both|OAlex fields” corresponds to citation counts

from OpenAlex, transformed into a field and year normalised citation score using the NLCS



formula, where the dominator of the formula consists of articles indexed by both Scopus and

OpenAlex (with the same DOI) and classified into the same OpenAlex field.


## Results


There were 30,123,865 articles with DOIs from Scopus and OpenAlex combined for the years

2014-2020. All articles in Scopus contained a subject classification but 1,472,420 from

OpenAlex did not (e.g., the case report 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2019.0027) so the effective

sample size was 28,651,445 journal articles. OpenAlex contained over twice as many articles

as Scopus (Table 2).



Table 2. Number of journal articles in Scopus and OpenAlex by publication year.

Both

Scopus

and

OpenAlex

OpenAlex

but not

Scopus

Total

2014

1631903

3248341

1252466

379437

1995875

3627778

2015

1723950

3401330

1640627

83323

1760703

3484653

2016

1794387

3640650

1722085

72302

1918565

3712952

2017

1867502

3871401

1794360

73142

2077041

3944543

2018

1995996

4158490

1917273

78723

2241217

4237213

2019

2219803

4468685

2120222

99581

2348463

4568266

2020

2449836

4950270

2324066

125770

2626204

5076040

Total

13683377 27739167 12771099

912278 14968068 28651445



The gold standard contained 97,816 REF2021 journal articles with non-short abstracts (Table

3). Some articles are in multiple UoAs so the total of the UoAs is greater than the number of

articles in the combined set.

Scopus

but not

OpenAlex

Publication

Year

Scopus

OpenAlex



Table 3. Sample sizes for both gold standards.

UoA

Name

Articles

1 Clinical Medicine

9727

2 Public Health, Health Services and Primary Care

3766

3 Allied Health Professions, Dentistry, Nursing and Pharmacy

9088

4 Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience

7578

5 Biological Sciences

6056

6 Agriculture, Food and Veterinary Sciences

3016

7 Earth Systems and Environmental Sciences

3565

8 Chemistry

2649

9 Physics

3695

10 Mathematical Sciences

3046

11 Computer Science and Informatics

4103

12 Engineering

14445

13 Architecture, Built Environment and Planning

2265

14 Geography and Environmental Studies

3075

15 Archaeology

467

16 Economics and Econometrics

819

17 Business and Management Studies

9835

18 Law

1437

19 Politics and International Studies

1939

20 Social Work and Social Policy

2662

21 Sociology

1226

22 Anthropology and Development Studies

783

23 Education

2733

24 Sport and Exercise Sciences, Leisure and Tourism

2619

25 Area Studies

420

26 Modern Languages and Linguistics

745

27 English Language and Literature

524

28 History

710

29 Classics

78

30 Philosophy

446

31 Theology and Religious Studies

164

32 Art and Design: History, Practice and Theory

886

33 Music, Drama, Dance, Performing Arts, Film and Screen Studies

445

34 Communication, Cultural & Media Studies, Library & Information Management

810

All

All the above, excluding duplicates

97816

Comparison between indicators on average across UoAs

There are substantial differences between indicators in the extent to which they correlate

with ChatGPT scores, on average across UoAs, although all correlations are positive (Figure

1). The two sets of bars in this figure are based on (a) the correlations calculated separately

for each UoA (n=34) and then averaged across UoAs and (b) the correlations calculated

separately for each UoA and year (n=34x7=238) and then averaged. Since there are 32

indicators calculated separately, the underlying data for Figure 1 consists of

34x32+238x32=8,704 separate correlations between indicators and average ChatGPT scores,

collectively covering 97,816 articles (some multiple times) for each indicator. This section



describes the results, and the Discussion speculates about the underlying causes. To avoid

overcomplicating the presentation of results, the research questions are explicitly addressed

only in the Discussion.

The relative value of the indicators varies according to whether the correlations are

calculated for all years together or separately by year. The main analysis focuses on the

calculation for all years together, which corresponds to how they would be used in the REF.

For all years analysed together (blue bars in Figure 1), the main patterns can be identified

by comparing indicators where all factors are the same except one. For the source of data for

the counts (RQ1) (either overall or in the NLCS or NCS formulae), the source with the highest

correlation with ChatGPT is as follows, where x represents the component of the calculation

being compared and italic indicates orders that are out of sequence compared to most of the

other results.

• Scopus: None

• OAlex: All (e.g., x|Count||, x|NLCS|Both|OAlex fields)

Comparing indicator formulae (RQ2) for the one with the highest correlation:

• Counts: None (but comparable to the best NCS)

• NLCS: None

• NCS: All (e.g., OAlex|x|Both|OAlex fields, Scopus|x|Scopus|Scopus fields)

Comparing categorisation schemes (RQ3) (italics emphasise unusual orderings):

• OAlex|NCS|Both|x: Domains>fields>subfields>topics>Scopus fields

• Scopus|NCS|Both|x: Domains>fields>subfields>topics>Scopus fields

• OAlex|NLCS|Both|x: Domains>fields>topics>subfields>Scopus fields

• OAlex|NCS|OAlex|x: Domains>fields>subfields>topics

• Scopus|NLCS|Both|x: Domains>fields>subfields>Scopus fields>topics

• OAlex|NLCS| OAlex |x: Domains>fields >topics>subfields

• Scopus|NCS|Scopus|x: Scopus fields

• Scopus|NLCS|Scopus|x: Scopus fields

Comparing document classification scopes (RQ4):

• OAlex|NCS|x|OAlex domains: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NCS|x|OAlex fields: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NCS|x|OAlex subfields: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NCS|x|OAlex topics: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NLCS|x|OAlex domains: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NLCS|x|OAlex fields: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NLCS|x|OAlex subfields: Both>OAlex

• OAlex|NLCS|x|OAlex topics: Both>OAlex

• Scopus|NCS|x|Scopus fields: Both>Scopus

• Scopus|NLCS|x|Scopus fields: Both>Scopus

Overall (RQ5), it is clear that from the perspective of the highest overall correlation with

ChatGPT for all years together (blue bars in Figure 1), that OpenAlex citation counts are

preferable to those from Scopus, the optimal formula is NCS (although raw counts are a close

second), the OpenAlex domains classification scheme is optimal and only documents

classified by both Scopus and OpenAlex as journal articles should be included for the best


## results.




When the correlations are calculated separately by year (orange bars in Figure 1), the

pattern is similar, but the main change is that raw citation counts are substantially better than



any indicator. Thus, the main advantage of field and year normalisation formulae is that they

make it fairer to compare articles from different years and not that they make it fairer to

compare articles published in different fields.

Figure 1. Weighted mean Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT

scores for all qualifying REF articles, where the mean is taken over all 34 UoA correlations,

weighted by the number of articles assessed in the UoA. The “overall” variant is based on all

years combined within each UoA (i.e., one correlation per UoA), and the “by year” variant

involves the correlations calculated separately for each UoA and year (i.e., one correlation

per year x UoA), and averaged.



The order of the results changes little if average ChatGPT scores (i.e., the primary gold

standard) are replaced with departmental average REF scores (i.e., the secondary gold

standard) (Figure 2). Because higher scoring departments tended to submit a higher

proportion of older articles and these tended to be more cited, there is a second order effect

to favour citation counts for this comparison, which may be why the highest correlation is for



raw counts rather than the field and year normalised NCS, and why calculating correlations

by year makes less difference to the correlations than for the ChatGPT gold standard.

Figure 2. Weighted mean Spearman correlations between indicator values and departmental

average scores for all qualifying REF articles, where the mean is taken over all 34 UoA

correlations, weighted by the number of articles assessed in the UoA. The y-axis order is the

same as for Figure 1. The “overall” variant is based on all years combined within each UoA

(i.e., one correlation per UoA), and the “by year” variant involves the correlations calculated

separately for each UoA and year (i.e., one correlation per year x UoA), and averaged.



If all UoAs are combined for a single correlation with the main ChatGPT gold standard, rather

than averaging the correlations calculated separately for each UoA, then the results change

substantially (Figure 3). Surprisingly, simple counts are the best indicator overall (i.e., with the

highest correlation with ChatGPT scores), despite the disadvantage that they give to more

recently published articles. Some correlations for NLCS applied to OpenAlex data are very

weak.



Figure 3. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for all

qualifying REF articles. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the

same as for Figure 1. Note the different x axis scale to the previous figures.

Differences between UoAs in relative indicator values (RQ6)

The patterns in the correlations with ChatGPT scores by indicator for individual UoAs (see

below) differ substantially from the overall pattern for the correlations when all years are

combined (Figure 1, blue bars, which only fits the four UoAs of pattern 7 in Table 4; see

below). Comparing the overall graph shapes is difficult because their confidence intervals are

wide, but the graphs can be clustered heuristically into nine approximate patterns to illustrate

some differences (Table 4). In these descriptions, “increasing” means a general tendency for

correlations to be higher when they are lower down in the y axis of Figure 1.



Table 4. Approximate patterns in graphs of the correlations between the 32 indicators and

the ChatGPT gold standard for the 34 UoAs.



ID

Pattern

UoAs following this pattern

1

All correlations have similar

strengths, with mostly

overlapping 95% confidence

intervals

6 UoAs: Chemistry; Physics; Mathematical Sciences;

Engineering; Politics and International Studies; Area

Studies (Figure 4)

2

As pattern 1 but the first 2

correlations  (i.e., the 2

topmost bars) weak.

1: Law (Figure 5)

3

As pattern 1 but the first 3

correlations weak.

1: Business and Management Studies (Figure 5)

4

As pattern 1 but the first 4

correlations weak.

2: Architecture, Built Environment and Planning;

Economics and Econometrics (Figure 6)

5

As pattern 1 but the first 5

correlations weak.

4: Public Health, Health Services and Primary Care;

History; Education; Art and Design: History, Practice

and Theory (Figure 7)

6

First 4 correlations weak,

then generally increasing.

1: Geography and Environmental Studies (Figure 8)

7

First 5 correlations weak,

then generally increasing.

4: Sport and Exercise Sciences, Leisure and Tourism;

Clinical Medicine; Allied Health Professions,

Dentistry, Nursing and Pharmacy; Psychology,

Psychiatry and Neuroscience (Figure 9)

8

Generally increasing,

although at rates varying

between UoAs

11: Biological Sciences; Agriculture, Food and

Veterinary Sciences; Earth Systems and

Environmental Sciences; Archaeology; Social Work

and Social Policy; Sociology; Anthropology and

Development Studies; Modern Languages and

Linguistics; English Language and Literature; Music,

Drama, Dance, Performing Arts, Film and Screen

Studies; Communication, Cultural and Media Studies,

Library and Information Management (Figure 11)

9

Highly variable

4: Computer Science and Informatics; Classics;

Philosophy; Theology and Religious Studies (Figure

12)



Figure 4. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 1: All correlations have similar strengths, with mostly overlapping



95% confidence intervals. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the

same as for Figure 1. Note the differing x axis scales.

Figure 5. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 2 (left) and pattern 3 (right): All correlations have similar strengths,

with mostly overlapping 95% confidence intervals, except that the first two/three correlations

are weak (topmost bars). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 6. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 4: All correlations have similar strengths, with mostly overlapping

95% confidence intervals, except that the first four correlations are weak (topmost four bars).

Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note

the differing x axis scales.



Figure 7. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 5: All correlations have similar strengths, with mostly overlapping

95% confidence intervals, except that the first five correlations are weak (topmost bars). Error

bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note the

differing x axis scales.



Figure 8. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 6: First 4 correlations weak, then generally increasing. Error bars

indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note the

differing x axis scales.



Figure 9. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 7: First 5 correlations weak, then generally increasing. Error bars

indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note the

differing x axis scales.



Figure 10. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 8: Generally increasing, although at rates varying between UoAs.



Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note

the differing x axis scales.

Figure 11. Spearman correlations between indicator values and ChatGPT scores for UoAs

matching Table 1, pattern 9: Highly variable. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. The

y-axis order is the same as for Figure 1. Note the differing x axis scales.


## Discussion


Limitations

The results are limited to the particular download of OpenAlex and it seems likely that its

contents, indexing technology and classifications will evolve over time. The restriction to

articles with DOIs is also a drawback, and OpenAlex might index many low-quality documents

without DOIs. Indexing additional low-quality documents unequally between fields would

give a field normalised indicator advantage to articles in fields where they were prevalent



because they would reduce the mean citation rate for those fields, increasing the normalised

indicator values for genuine articles by comparison.

The ChatGPT scores have unknown biases, and, most importantly, may be influenced

by citation counts. REF scores are also relatively coarse grained and the use of departmental

average score proxies has a damping effect on the magnitude of correlations for the

secondary gold standard. The ChatGPT quality scores also have field biases relative to the REF,

tending to give higher scores to some UoAs than others, with the differences seeming to

favour more highly cited fields (Thelwall & Kurt, 2024). Thus, whilst the known between-UoA

biases do not directly influence the within-UoA correlations reported here, their existence

suggests that there may well also be within-UoA citation biases in the ChatGPT scores,

although their extent is unknown. It is therefore unsafe to draw strong conclusions about the

relative strengths of citation counts, NCS and NLCS. Moreover, the citation counts used here

are relatively mature, with almost all being at least five years old, and the influence of age

would be sharper for newer articles. Using newer data would therefore tend to reduce the

citation count correlation and possibly the NCS correlation relative to the others.

Comparison with prior research

The results are broadly consistent with two small-scale prior studies in the sense of the

relatively high correlation for raw citation counts compared to other indicators for multi-year


## data (Bornmann & Leydesdorff, 2013; Fazel & Wolf, 2017) but cannot be directly compared


to the other studies cited in the introduction. The results also align with the superiority of

article-based subject classification over journal-based subject classification (Klavans &

Boyack, 2017).

Answers to research questions

RQ1: Is OpenAlex better than Scopus for citation counts?

The answer to this is yes because indicators based on its data have the highest correlations

with the gold standards, albeit marginally and with the statistical advantage of more

indicators in the 32 being compared (so more chances to take advantage of random factors

in the data). Since Scopus is more mature, it seems possible that its citations have been more

accurately extracted. Its citation sources are presumably more consistently high quality.

Nevertheless, these hypothesised advantages have not compensated for the higher citation

counts overall for OpenAlex (OpenAlex citation counts were higher for 75% of the gold

standard articles and lower for 15%), obtained from its greater coverage.

RQ2: Which is the best research quality formula: counts, NCS or NLCS?

The results (Figure 1, orange bars, representing seven years of articles analysed together)

suggest that the best individual indicator for UoAs (and perhaps therefore broad fields or

subject categories) is NCS, closely followed by citation counts, and with NLCS being the worst.

Taking into account the fact that many variants of NCS were calculated and that citation

counts almost equalled the best NCS, it seems reasonable to consider this to be effectively a

tie between citation counts and NCS to offset the multiple chances for NCS. Moreover, for

science as a whole with all UoAs merged into a single set for analysis, raw citation counts are

best (Figure 3), and when years are analysed separately, raw citation counts are also the best

(Figure 1, blue bars, representing articles only being compared against others from the same

year). This is surprising because the advantage of NLCS and NCS seem intuitively to be clear



and substantial, but the data suggests, at least for the classification schemes and databases

used here, that the only advantage of field normalisation formulae is that they also normalise

for publication year.

RQ3: Which is the best subject classification scheme?

The best subject classification scheme was the OpenAlex domains, with the order being

mostly Domains>fields>subfields>topics>Scopus Fields. Thus, there is a tendency for the

article-based OpenAlex subject classifications to work better than the Scopus journal-based

multiple classifications, and, within OpenAlex, for a small number (4) of large categories to be

optimal (i.e., its domains). At this level of granularity and taking into account the correlation

similarity with raw citation counts, it seems that field normalisation, as traditionally explained

and justified implicitly on a much finer grained level (e.g., Glanzel et al., 2009; Waltman et al.,

2011), is not working. This issue is discussed again below.

RQ4: Does OpenAlex or Scopus have the best coverage of journal articles for field

normalisation formulae?

This question can’t be directly answered. The optimal strategy was to only include documents

classified by both sources as journal articles. It isn’t possible to directly compare the OpenAlex

and Scopus document type classifications because not all other factors can be held constant

when comparing these. Nevertheless, whilst OpenAlex seems to perform better than Scopus

on most parameters, excluding articles not indexed in Scopus provides a substantial

improvement.

RQ5: Which is the best overall approach for calculating research quality indicators from

OpenAlex or Scopus?

The overall best approach for UoAs over the seven year period was to use citation counts

from OpenAlex with the NCS formula, classifying documents by OpenAlex domain, but

restricting the scope of the documents to those that are classified as journal articles by Scopus

and OpenAlex. Raw citation counts from OpenAlex were best for all UoAs combined, and for

individual UoAs and years.

RQ6: Are there field differences in the answer to RQ5?

There are substantial differences between UoAs in the overall trends, as evidenced by the

nine differing patterns identified. For example, NLCS is the best formula for Clinical Medicine

and the narrowest classification, OpenAlex topics, is best for Physics, at least in terms of

correlations with ChatGPT scores.

Is OpenAlex suitable for citation-based indicators?

Although the optimal citation-based indicator combines information from both Scopus and

OpenAlex, the second best one, OpenAlex citation counts (Figure 1) are almost as good, so

OpenAlex is technically suitable for constructing citation-based indicators. If only field

normalised

indicators

are

considered,

then

the

best

OpenAlex-only

indicator

(OAlex|NCS|OAlex |OAlex domains) is substantially weaker but still reasonably strong in

terms of correlation with average ChatGPT scores.



Is field normalisation needed?

Surprisingly, the results suggest that field and year normalisation is unnecessary for articles

with mature citation counts. Although the strongest overall broad field (i.e., UoAs) correlation

used NCS rather than raw citation counts, the OpenAlex domains used encompass only four

classes and the difference in correlations is only marginal, and was only evident for the seven

years combined, rather than for the years treated separately. Thus, year normalisation is

necessary but not field normalisation.

It seems reasonable to expect that normalisation would still be necessary for sets of

articles where there was a range of ages that included relatively new articles, such as less than

three years old, as well as older articles. It also seems reasonable to speculate that, in general,

for articles with mature citation counts, expert quality judgements correlate better with raw

citation counts than with normalised citation counts based on appropriately narrow (e.g., 27+

fields) fields.

The strength of raw citation counts as a research quality indicator that is almost as

effective as the best field normalised citation formula tested is surprising given that field

normalisation is a central tenet of scientometrics. Its value seems to be driven by the belief

that low citation specialties can be as important as high citation specialties because their

lower counts reflect factors irrelevant to research quality, such as short reference lists, a

tendency to cite non-article documents including books, or an applied orientation with non-

scholarly impacts. The value of field normalisation never seems to have been compared with

raw citation counts against an independent indicator of research quality at scale before, so

its relative weakness is a new finding. There are many possible explanations for this result,

including the following.

• All subject classification schemes tested are ineffective at grouping together articles

from similar specialities, so whilst field normalisation is a good idea in theory, in

practice it does not work with existing subject classification schemes – or at least the

ones tested here from Scopus and OpenAlex.

• There is a strong tendency for more cited specialities to produce research that experts

tend to regard as higher quality. At the journal level, for example, this would allow

Journal Impact Factors (JIFs) to be compared between fields and all of the most cited

journals in a low citation field might tend to publish lower quality research than all

least cited journals in a high citation field.

Both above may be true to some extent. It seems reasonable to consider the possibility that

a more accurate subject classification scheme might produce better field normalised

indicators, and this is a challenge for future research. Existing classification schemes may also

work better, such as that of Dimensions or the Web of Science, as might a different way of

applying the Scopus or OpenAlex schemes. Nevertheless, it also seems likely, based on the


## results, that field normalisation at a reasonable level of granularity (e.g., 27+ fields) goes too


far in equalising between specialities when there are genuine average quality differences

between them. One prior study has suggested that there may be field differences in quality

standards, at least for interdisciplinary research (Thelwall et al., 2023b). To give an extreme

example, it seems plausible that almost all clinical medicine would be regarded by most

academics as better than all scientometrics because it tends to be more expensive, larger

scale, with greater ethical concerns, and a bigger (at least direct) influence on humanity. Field

normalising citations to allow the two to be compared, whether with NCS or NLCS, may go

too far in equalising them for research evaluations.



Broad or narrow subject categories for NLCS and NCS?

The results suggest that broader subject categories are better for field normalisation, perhaps

because narrow categories go too far in equalising between specialties.

NLCS or NCS?

NCS seems to be better than NLCS, although not for all fields. This is surprising because NLCS

was designed to solve the statistical problem with NCS that its values could be unduly

influenced by a minority of highly cited articles in the denominator of the calculations. A

possible explanation is that a side-effect of the NLCS reducing the importance of highly cited

articles to the denominator of the NLCS formula is that it increases the relative importance of

uncited articles. This can cause problems if there are many uncited articles that are not

genuine articles but are other uncitable document types, such as editorials, or less cited

document types, like short form articles.

NCS seems to be better than NLCS in both Scopus and OpenAlex, so document

classification issues may affect each one. It is not clear whether this problem is due to errors

and thus avoidable in theory. Whilst there are clear problems with OpenAlex’s coarse

document type classification scheme (i.e., everything in a journal is an article), but not

necessarily in Scopus, although it seems to index too many uncited articles (Thelwall, 2016).

This could also be a more fundamental issue of uncitable or rarely cited documents occurring

in the scientific record that are nevertheless valid journal articles. Another possibility is that

mixed article lengths cause a much higher proportion of uncited articles than would be the

case if all had similar lengths.


## Conclusions


Although the results are not conclusive due to a reliance on ChatGPT with unknown biases

and indirect and age-biased expert quality scores from the REF, they suggest that OpenAlex

is suitable for citation analysis, especially if its document type classifications are helped by

Scopus. The graphs for the different UoAs above may help to suggest which variant of NLCS

or NCS and which classification scheme would be most suitable.



The unexpected result that field normalisation has little or no value for mature citation


## data, at least in the configurations tested here (Scopus multiple field classifications, OpenAlex


primary classifications), is counterintuitive and needs further exploration before changes are

made to practice. Nevertheless, it should at least raise the possibility that one of the effects

of field normalisation is to equalise between fields or specialties that are genuinely different

in average research quality. Thus, scientometricians should not assume that the most cited

from one field are as good as the most cited from another and should accept the possibility

that there are genuine differences in average quality levels between fields and between

specialties. Given that quality standards and criteria differ between fields, making direct

comparisons to verify this would be difficult. Whilst it might be rare to directly compare very

different fields in a single research evaluation, this can occur when multidisciplinary

departments are assessed or when a department includes supporting specialities, such as

statistics.



Despite the above conclusions, for policy reasons, research evaluators might take the

perspective that it is necessary to start with the assumption that all fields or specialties are

equal and design their systems to ensure that the results reflect this. For example, in the REF,

it would cause substantial arguments if the average scores were allowed to differ substantially



between UoAs. On this basis, field normalisation might be used as a tool to help achieve an

imaginary equality between fields/specialties rather than to reflect an existing equality.


## References


Alperin, J. P., Portenoy, J., Demes, K., Larivière, V., & Haustein, S. (2024). An analysis of the

suitability

of

OpenAlex

for

bibliometric

analyses.

arXiv.

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.17663

Bornmann, L., & Leydesdorff, L. (2013). The validation of (advanced) bibliometric indicators

through peer assessments: A comparative study using data from InCites and F1000.

Journal of Informetrics, 7(2), 286-291.

Bornmann, L., & Marx, W. (2015). Methods for the generation of normalized citation impact

scores in bibliometrics: Which method best reflects the judgements of experts? Journal

of Informetrics, 9(2), 408-418.

Brzezinski, M. (2015). Power laws in citation distributions: evidence from Scopus.

Scientometrics, 103, 213-228.

Céspedes, L., Kozlowski, D., Pradier, C., Sainte‐Marie, M. H., Shokida, N. S., Benz, P., &

Larivière, V. (2025). Evaluating the linguistic coverage of OpenAlex: An assessment of

metadata accuracy and completeness. Journal of the Association for Information

Science and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24979

Culbert, J., Hobert, A., Jahn, N., Haupka, N., Schmidt, M., Donner, P., & Mayr, P. (2024).


## Reference coverage analysis of OpenAlex compared to Web of Science and Scopus.


arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.16359

De Bellis, N. (2009). Bibliometrics and citation analysis: from the science citation index to

cybermetrics. Scarecrow press.

Fazel, S., & Wolf, A. (2017). What is the impact of a research publication? BMJ Mental Health,

20(2), 33-34.

Glänzel, W., Thijs, B., Schubert, A., & Debackere, K. (2009). Subfield-specific normalized

relative indicators and a new generation of relational charts: Methodological

foundations illustrated on the assessment of institutional research performance.

Scientometrics, 78, 165-188.

Haupka, N., Culbert, J. H., Schniedermann, A., Jahn, N., & Mayr, P. (2024). Analysis of the

publication and document types in OpenAlex, Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed and

Semantic Scholar. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15154.

Jiao, C., Li, K., & Fang, Z. (2023). How are exclusively data journals indexed in major scholarly


## databases? An examination of the Web of Science, Scopus, Dimensions, and


OpenAlex. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09704.

Klavans, R., & Boyack, K. W. (2017). Which type of citation analysis generates the most

accurate taxonomy of scientific and technical knowledge? Journal of the Association for

Information Science and Technology, 68(4), 984-998.

Langfeldt, L., Nedeva, M., Sörlin, S., & Thomas, D. A. (2020). Co-existing notions of research

quality: A framework to study context-specific understandings of good research.

Minerva, 58(1), 115-137.

Lundberg, J. (2007). Lifting the crown - citation z-score. Journal of informetrics, 1(2), 145-154.

Maddi, A., Maisonobe, M., & Boukacem-Zeghmouri, C. (2024). Geographical and Disciplinary

Coverage of Open Access Journals: OpenAlex, Scopus and WoS. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2411.03325.



Moed, H. F. (2006). Citation analysis in research evaluation. Springer Science & Business

Media.

Milyaeva, S., & Neyland, D. (2023). Let’s agree to agree: The situational academic quality of

the UK REF as consensual public knowledge. Social Studies of Science, 53(3), 427-448.

OpenAlex (2025). Topics. https://docs.openalex.org/api-entities/topics

Priem, J., Piwowar, H., & Orr, R. (2022). OpenAlex: A fully-open index of scholarly works,

authors, venues, institutions, and concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01833.

Purkayastha, A., Palmaro, E., Falk-Krzesinski, H. J., & Baas, J. (2019). Comparison of two article-

level, field-independent citation metrics: Field-Weighted Citation Impact (FWCI) and

Relative Citation Ratio (RCR). Journal of Informetrics, 13(2), 635-642.

Thelwall, M. (2016). Are there too many uncited articles? Zero inflated variants of the

discretised lognormal and hooked power law distributions. Journal of Informetrics,

10(2), 622-633. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2016.04.014

Thelwall, M. (2017). Three practical field normalised alternative indicator formulae for

research evaluation. Journal of Informetrics, 11(1), 128-151.

Thelwall, M. (2024). Can ChatGPT evaluate research quality? Journal of Data and Information

Science, 9(2), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.2478/jdis-2024-0013

Thelwall, M. (2025). Evaluating research quality with Large Language Models: An analysis of

ChatGPT’s effectiveness with different settings and inputs. Journal of Data and

Information Science, 10(1), 1-19. https://doi.org/10.2478/jdis-2025-0011

Thelwall, M., Jiang, X., & Bath, P. A. (2024). Evaluating the quality of published medical

research with ChatGPT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01952.

Thelwall, M., Kousha, K., Stuart, E., Makita, M., Abdoli, M., Wilson, P., & Levitt, J. (2023a). In

which fields are citations indicators of research quality? Journal of the Association for

Information Science and Technology, 74(8), 941-953.

Thelwall, M., Kousha, K., Stuart, E., Makita, M., Abdoli, M., Wilson, P. & Levitt, J. (2023b). Does

the perceived quality of interdisciplinary research vary between fields? Journal of

Documentation. 79(6), 1514-1531. https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2023-0012

Thelwall, M., & Kurt, Z. (2024). Research evaluation with ChatGPT: Is it age, country, length,

or field biased? arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09768.

Thelwall, M., & Yaghi, A. (2024). In which fields can ChatGPT detect journal article quality? An

evaluation of REF2021 results. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16695.

van Raan, A. F. (2004). Measuring science. Handbook of quantitative science and technology

research. Springer (pp. 19-50).

Waltman, L., van Eck, N. J., van Leeuwen, T. N., Visser, M. S., & van Raan, A. F. (2011). Towards

a new crown indicator: Some theoretical considerations. Journal of Informetrics, 5(1),

37-47.

Waltman, L., Calero‐Medina, C., Kosten, J., Noyons, E. C., Tijssen, R. J., van Eck, N. J., &

Wouters, P. (2012). The Leiden Ranking 2011/2012: Data collection, indicators, and

interpretation. Journal of the American Society for Information Science And

Technology, 63(12), 2419-2432.

Wilsdon, J., Allen, L., Belfiore, E., Campbell, P., Curry, S., Hill, S., & Viney, I. (2015). The metric

tide: report of the independent review of the role of metrics in research assessment

and management. https://www.ukri.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/RE-151221-

TheMetricTideFullReport2015.pdf