The role of preprints in open science: Accelerating knowledge transfer from

science to technology

Zhiqi Wanga,b,*, Yue Chenb,*, Chun Yangb

a School of Management, Liaoning Normal University, Dalian, 116081, China

b Institute of Science of Science and S&T Management & WISELab, Dalian University of

Technology, Dalian, 116024, China


## Abstract


Preprints have become increasingly essential in the landscape of open science, facilitating not only

the exchange of knowledge within the scientific community but also bridging the gap between

science and technology. However, the impact of preprints on technological innovation, given their

unreviewed nature, remains unclear. This study fills this gap by conducting a comprehensive

scientometric analysis of patent citations to bioRxiv preprints submitted between 2013 and 2021,

measuring and accessing the contribution of preprints in accelerating knowledge transfer from

science to technology. Our findings reveal a growing trend of patent citations to bioRxiv preprints,

with a notable surge in 2020, primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. Preprints play a critical

role in accelerating innovation, not only expedite the dissemination of scientific knowledge into

technological innovation but also enhance the visibility of early research results in the patenting

process, while journals remain essential for academic rigor and reliability. The substantial number

of post-online-publication patent citations highlights the critical role of the open science model—

particularly the “open access” effect of preprints—in amplifying the impact of science on

technological innovation. This study provides empirical evidence that open science policies

encouraging the early sharing of research outputs, such as preprints, contribute to more efficient

linkage between science and technology, suggesting an acceleration in the pace of innovation,

higher innovation quality, and economic benefits.

Keywords

Preprints; Linkage between science and technology; Knowledge flow; Patent citation analysis;

Open science

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: zhiqi_wang90@126.com (Z. Wang), chenyuedlut@163.com (Y. Chen).




## 1. Introduction


Preprints are integral components of the open science ecosystem, designed to rapidly and

efficiently disseminate the lasted research findings to relevant audiences. Historically, preprints

have played a crucial role in fields, such as Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science

(Ginsparg, 1994, 2011). More recently, in the life sciences, the bioRxiv preprint server was

launched in 2013, followed by medRxiv preprint server, both of which saw a significant increase

in usage during the COVID-19 pandemic (Fraser et al., 2022). There is substantial evidence

supporting the vital role of preprints in scholarly communication, including their ability to

accelerate knowledge dissemination, broaden the reach and impact of research, and promote

academic autonomy (Fraser et al., 2020; Wang, 2019; Wang, Chen, et al., 2020; Wang, Glänzel, et

al., 2020). In the new era of open science, open access to scientific knowledge is recognized for

its potential to broaden access to information, benefit both science and society, and foster

innovation and participation in the co-creation of knowledge (United Nations Educational, 2021).

This context highlights the social impact of research output, especially the contribution of

scientific knowledge to today’s innovation.

Exploring the connection between science and technology enhances our understanding of how

the flow and integration of knowledge drive innovation. Whereas citations between research

papers capture knowledge flow within the academic community and are commonly used to assess

the research impact of scientific publications (Glänzel & Chi, 2016; Glänzel & Schoepflin, 1995),

patent citations to scientific literature – referred to as scientific non-patent references (SNPRs) –

more directly captures the knowledge transfer from basic scientific research to technological

innovation, a critical precursor to commercial products (Cao et al., 2023; Higham et al., 2021; Li

et al., 2014; Munari et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2022). Therefore, SNPRs provide a complementary

measure of the broader impact of academic research beyond traditional scientific communication.

This is particularly important because some scholarly publications hold commercial value or have

real-world applications that do not directly translate into academic citations.

Our research contributes to the literature as the first study to explore patents citing preprints,

providing new insights into how preprints influence technological innovation and knowledge

translation within the open science framework. In this paper, we compare the trend of patent

citations and the time taken to be cited in patenting activities across two data sets: preprints versus

journal papers, and journal articles with preprint versions versus those without. Additionally, we

conduct a comparative analysis to explore the citing behaviors of preprint in patenting process

versus journal-based scholarly communications. This analysis addresses the following research

questions:

RQ1: How quickly is scientific knowledge from preprints transferred into technological

innovation?

2



RQ2: Do preprints enhance the visibility of early research findings in the technological

innovation process?

RQ3: How does the role of preprints differ in terms of accelerating the dissemination and

application of scientific knowledge in technological innovation and scholarly communication?


## 2. Related works


2.1 Knowledge linkage between science and technology: Insights from patent citation analysis

Since Narin et al. (1997) employed bibliometrics to analyze patent citations to scientific

literature, aiming to assess the value of basic research for technological innovation, bibliometric

studies of patent citations have become a significant focus in fields such as econometrics,

scientometrics, and innovation studies (A.F. van Raan, 2017). The scientific foundation of a patent

is acknowledged through curated citations to other patents and research publications to indicate

the novelty of a technological invention to the patent office (Alcácer et al., 2009; Ke, 2020;

Manjunath et al., 2021). Tracking scientific literature cited in patents reveals a potential pathway

through which technological inventors become aware of and recognize scientific articles. This

tracking offers valuable evidence regarding the commercial value or, at the very least, the

technological innovation impact of scientific research (Jahn et al., 2022; Kousha & Thelwall, 2017;

Sternitzke, 2009).

Promoting the integration of interdisciplinary knowledge and the fusion of science and

technology is an essential trend for fostering disruptive innovation (Park, Leahey & Funk, 2023;

Betz et al., 2023). Patent-to-research citations have been utilized to explore the connection

between science and technology among different types of innovation entities and their various

innovation activities (Huang et al., 2014). Early studies have demonstrated that scientific

advancements are not just theoretical but are actively reshaping industrial technology (Carpenter

et al., 1980; Narin et al., 1997; McMillan, Narin & Deeds, 2000). The value of scientific research

is increasingly evident in its role in advancing the technological frontier. By exploring the forward

citations of two patent groups—those that cite scientific publications and those that do not—

researchers have found that knowledge transfer from science correlates with the impact of patents.

This suggests that science-based patents tend to have a greater social impact (Wang & Li, 2018;

Chen et al., 2024). There is also a growing positive relationship between firms’ technological

innovation performance and their engagement in basic scientific research activities (Leten et al.,

2014; Hung, 2012). Furthermore, studies have shown that the more heavily firms rely on scientific

outputs, the more valuable and innovative their producing patents tend to be (Krieger, Monika, &

Martin, 2024; Chen et al., 2024).

3



2.2 Paper characteristics influence the knowledge transfer from science to technology

The characteristics of scientific publications also significantly influence their direct

technological impact (Ding et al., 2017). Yang (2024) conducted an in-depth analysis of research

funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF),

demonstrating that the funded research tends to receive higher citation counts in both academic

literature and patents. These findings underscore the consistently positive influence of NIH and

NSF funding on research impact and dual innovation. Empirical studies further indicate that novel

scientific research exhibits greater direct and indirect technological impact, has a broader reach

across technology fields, and is more likely to lead to novel patents compared to non-novel

scientific research (Veugelers & Wang, 2019). Recently research utilizing large-scale scientific and

patent data reveals that basic science papers and novel papers typically take less time to transition

into technological applications and receive substantially more patent citations (Ke, 2020; Munari

et al., 2022). This finding highlights the importance of considering the nature of scientific output

when assessing its potential for technological advancement and innovation. However, the

connection between scientific novelty, delayed recognition, and technological impact remains

complex (Veugelers & Wang, 2019). A.F. van Raan & J.J Winnink (2018) examined the

characteristics of Sleeping Beauties (SBs) cited in patents (SB-SNPRs), suggesting that the

average time lag between an SB-SNPR’s publication and its first citation in patents is decreasing,

and that they are awakened increasingly earlier by a ‘technological prince’ rather than by a

‘scientific prince’.

Patent citation patterns exhibit considerable variation across different technological fields.

Analyzing data from patents associated with NIH grants over a 27-year period, Li et al. (2017)

found that 30% of NIH-funded research articles are subsequently cited by patents. Notably, disease

targeted grants tend to produce publications being slightly more likely to be cited in patents

compared to grants that are not disease-oriented, though the difference is marginal. In contrast to

physical sciences and engineering, the life sciences exhibit a closer distance between scientific

research and technological development (Ahmadpoor & Jones, 2017; Veugelers & Wang, 2019).

Regarding the speed of knowledge transfer, Ahmadpoor and Jones (2017) examined 4.8 million

U.S. patents and 32 million research articles, revealing an average delay of 6.6 years between the

publication of a paper and its citation in a patent application.

2.3 The impact of Open Access on innovative processes

While the impact of Open Access (OA) on citation impact and altermatic performance has

been extensively studied (Piwowar et al., 2018; Fraser et al, 2020; Wang et al., 2020), its influence

on innovation and patent activity remains a relatively underexplored area. Jahn et al. (2022)

analyzed a dataset of 215,962 scientific non-patent references (SNPRs) published between 2008

4



and 2020, identifying a consistent increase in the proportion of OA articles cited in patents, with

nearly half of the referenced articles being openly accessible. Their findings also revealed

significant variations across countries and disciplines. Notably, patents originating from the US

and the UK, as well as those classified under the CPC section "A - Human Necessities,"

demonstrated a higher uptake of OA literature. Bryan and Ozcan (2021) examined how barriers

to the dissemination of academic research affect innovation by analyzing a sample of 43 medical

and biotechnology journals published between 2005 and 2012. Their findings indicate that the NIH

Open Access (OA) mandate had a modest but measurable positive effect on the citation of SNPRs.

Specifically, NIH-funded research saw a 12% to 27% increase in citations following the policy’s

implementation in 2008. They suggest that the main takeaway for firms is that limited access to

research can significantly impact the quality of their innovation. In contrast, making published

academic articles freely available online helps reduce barriers to the dissemination of research


## findings, enhances their broader social impact beyond academia, and particularly facilitates


knowledge transfer to industry, thereby fostering a more effective integration of scientific

discoveries into technological advancements, ultimately improving innovation efficiency.

Collectively, these studies highlight the potential of OA to bridge the gap between scientific

discovery and practical application, offering valuable insights into how open access to scientific

knowledge can influence the pace and direction of innovation. However, it remains unclear

whether preprint communication can effectively foster the connection between science and

technology. Preprints, characterized by early access, open access, and their unreviewed nature,

promise to accelerate dissemination in scientific knowledge and increase scientific collaboration.

Yet, their potential to facilitate the translation of scientific knowledge into technological

innovations and products remains under evaluation. To address this gap, we conduct a

comprehensive analysis of the impact of preprints on technology innovation, with a particular

focus on the speed at which science is transformed into technology, facilitated by open science

communication through the sharing of early research outputs as preprints.


## 3. Data and Methods


Life science, one of the fields that has embraced preprint publishing, with bioRxiv being the

most widely used preprint sever, offers a unique environment to explore the aforementioned

questions. Several factors contribute to this. First, Life Science is a major research field

experiencing significant shifts in research paradigms within the context of open science. The

selection of bioRxiv as one of the top ten scientific breakthroughs of 2017 by Science (Kaiser,


## 2017) highlights a substantial cultural shift in academic communication. The COVID-19 pandemic


has further accelerated this paradigm shift in the field (Fleerackers et al., 2024). Additionally,

previous studies have demonstrated a close relationship between patents and scientific

5



advancements in Life science, as technological development in this field are more directly

dependent on the scientific progress (WIPO, 2022).

3.1 Preprint, articles and patent metadata

This study uses three data sources: the bioRxiv preprint server for Biology, the Dimension


## database, and the Altmetric database. The process for identifying patents that cite bioRxiv preprints


and for obtaining detailed patent information is illustrated in Fig. 1. We harvested the basic

metadata of all preprints submitted to bioRxiv between November 2013 and December 2021 from

the Dimension database (N = 144,323). Next, we queried Altmetric.com for mentions of bioRxiv

preprints cited by patents with publication date between January 1, 2014 and December 30, 2022.

This search yielded a total of 4,060 mentions of 1,803 preprints across 2,934 patents. We didn’t

identify and combine patent families, as our focus was on pointing the specific patents citing

individual preprints rather than the broader patent families. Notably, only 201 out of 2,934 patents

(7.74%) were associated with 538 patent families, representing a small percentage.

Additionally, we acknowledge that some preprints may later be published as journal articles,

and subsequent patent applications may cite either or both versions. Therefore, we retrieved patent

citations for both preprints and their corresponding published versions by querying Altmetric.com

via the bioRxiv ID and the journal article DOI, respectively. Besides, we did not distinguish

applicant citations and examiner citations. Although these two types of citations may differ in

their underlying motivations (Alcacer & Gittelman, 2006; Alcácer et al., 2009) —for instance, for

inventors and applicants, citations are made to disclose knowledge of prior art, while for

examiners, citations serve as a justification for limiting the claims in the patent application during

the review process—prior research has demonstrated a strong correlation between the them

(Higham et al., 2021). Therefore, regardless of the type of patent citation, it captures the process

of knowledge flow. By combining both examiner and applicant citations, previous studies that

have successfully mapped knowledge flow using patent citations (Li et al., 2020; Park et al., 2023).

Since the primary objective of this paper is to depict the flow of scientific knowledge through

patent citations, merging these two types of citations allows for more comprehensive view of the

process.

6



Fig. 1. Process for Identifying Patents Citing bioRxiv Preprints and Obtaining Detailed Patent Information. Note:

The 6,875 bioRxiv-deposited articles and an equal number of non-deposited control articles were derived from

an open analysis dataset originally constructed and validated by Fraser et al. (2020).

3.2 Identifying COVID-19-related research

To identify COVID-19-related preprints and articles, we utilized a dataset of preprints labeled

as

“COVID-19

SARS-CoV-2

preprints

from

medRxiv

and

bioRxiv”

(https://connect.biorxiv.org/relate/content/181). However, since no pre-existing dataset of patents

explicitly marked as COVID-19-related is available, we conducted a keyword-based search in the

titles and abstracts of the patents using Python. The keywords included: coro-navirus, coronavirus,

covid-19, sars-cov, sars-cov-2, ncov-2019, 2019-ncov, hcov-19, sars-2, pandemic, covid, “Severe

Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2”, and “2019 ncov”. These keywords were optimized

by Fleerackers et al. (2024) and have been successfully employed in identifying news mentions of

COVID-19 research. To ensure the identified patents were indeed relevant to COVID-19 research,

we manually reviewed the results after performing the keyword-based matching, thereby

enhancing the accuracy of our analysis.

7



3.3 Paired datasets for comparative analysis

In consideration that the volume of patent application may vary over time in ways that are

unrelated to actual changes in patent citations, we established two pairs of experimental and control

groups. The first pair consists of bioRxiv preprints and their corresponding journal article versions,

while the second includes journal articles with deposited preprints (bioRxiv-deposited article) and

those without (control article), with each bioRxiv-deposited article matched to a single random

non-deposited article from the same journal, same calendar month and category in the control

group. The second dataset is derived from an open analysis dataset originally constructed and

validated by Fraser et al. (2020) and is used in a regression analysis to examine the impact of a

paper’s preprint-deposited status on the difference in patent citations between bioRxiv-deposited

articles and control articles. Together, these two datasets provide a robust foundation for our

comparative analysis of the effect of preprints on accelerating technological innovation.

3.4 Regression analysis

We acknowledge that citation behavior is influenced by a wide range of factors, including

document features, author features, journal features and document values (Tahamtan & Bornmann,

2018). To investigate the influence of ‘bioRxiv-deposited’ status on journal articles’ patent

citations when controlling for other additional factors, we incorporate a comprehensive set of

control variables that significantly influence the citation of articles and are empirically supported

in the regression model. The primary independent variable in our model is the ‘bioRxiv-deposited’

status of the journal paper, coded as a binary variable: “1” for bioRxiv-deposited articles, and “0”

for control articles. In addition to this key variable, we include additional control variables related

to author, document, and journal characteristics: Country and institutional prestige of the first and

last authors, their gender and academic age, number of references, number of pages, online

publication time, article open access (OA) status, the journal sub-disciplines and impact factor (IF).

The detailed procedures for data collection and processing of the other variables can be referenced

in Fraser et al. (2020), where the journal impact factor (IF) and academic age were calculated using

formula (a) and formula (b), respectively:

%&'#'&()*!"#$%&+%&'#'&()*!"#$'&

𝐼𝐹!"#$ =

,'"-*!"#$%&+,'"-*!"#$'&

(a)

𝐴𝑐𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑐 𝐴𝑔𝑒= 𝑃𝑌#$'&./" −𝑃𝑌0&$*' 23/&.#'&()         (b)

Where Citations are sourced from Scopus and Items assigned the document type “Article” or

“Review” (in Scopus) is included in the denominator. Items assigned any other document type are

excluded. 𝑃𝑌#$'&./" is the publication year of the article in question, and 𝑃𝑌0&$*' 234/&.#'&() is the

publication year of the author’s first formal publication recorded in Scopus.

8



It is important to note that, the open access (OA) status of an article is provided by Unpaywall

(https://unpaywall.org) and is determined based on its availability, irrespective of the specific

format in which it is made openly accessible. While this approach has certain limitations (e.g.,

some journal articles without associated preprints may have earlier conference papers), the

omission of such cases is unlikely to affect the overall findings. A query of Scopus using the DOIs

of both bioRxiv-deposited and control articles revealed that none of the articles were classified as

‘Conference Papers’. A subsequent query of Web of Science (WoS) yielded 26 bioRxiv-deposited

articles and 45 control articles classified as ‘Proceedings Paper’, representing 0.38% and 0.65%

of the respective datasets. Given the minimal proportions, this omission is not expected to impact

the results in any meaningful way.

Beyond the aforementioned variables, we incorporate the h-index of the first and last authors,

as well as the presence of NIH/NSF funding, as control variables, both of which have been

empirically shown to influence research impact (Álvarez-Bornstein & Bordons, 2021; Corsini &

Pezzoni, 2023; Yang, 2024). These data are obtained from the SciSciNet, a large-scale open data

lake for the science of science research (Lin et al., 2023). The descriptive statistics of the

continuous and categorical explanatory variables in the dataset are presented in Table 1 and Table

2, respectively. We collected all patent citation data for these samples. Detailed information on

citing patents was obtained from Google Patents, which offers a large searchable index of patents,

and providing the full text of patent records, including parent applications, priority applications,

legal events, lists of citing patents, family-to-family patent citations, and non-patent literature

citations. The bioRxiv API was used to obtain detailed metadata on bioRxiv preprints, including

first submission dates and journal publication information. Additionally, the Crossref API was

utilized to retrieve the online publication dates of journal articles.

Due to the highly skewed distribution of patent citations, with a variance significantly greater

than the mean (8.611 vs. 0.31), and the persistence of this overdispersion even after logarithmic

transformation (0.138 vs. 0.086), we employed a negative binomial regression to analyze the patent

count data. This method is recommended for analyzing citation count data (Thelwall & Wilson,

2014). We calculated the variance inflation factor (VIF) for all variables in the regression model,

and found that all VIF values were below the threshold of 10, indicating that multicollinearity is

within an acceptable range. We initially performed a reduced regression model to assess the

influence of the ‘bioRxiv-deposited’ status in the absence of the other independent variables listed

in Table 1 and Table 2. Following this, we applied a full regression model, including all variables.

Table 1 The summary statistics of the continuous explanatory variables

bioRxiv-deposited

Control

Variables

Min

Max

Mean

Median

Min

Max

Mean

Median

Author count

1

402

6.96

5

1

484

7.91

6

First author academic age

0

22

5.90

5

0

22

6.10

5

9



Last author academic age

0

22

15.52

17

0

24

16.12

19

First author h-index

0

120

12.68

10

0

181

11.79

8

Last author h-index

0

257

40.24

34

0

225

37.58

31

Journal impact factor

0.21

37.19

6.29

4.53

0.21

37.19

6.29

4.53

Number of pages

2

202

13.84

12

2

116

13.16

12

Number of references

2

488

55.82

53

1

443

54.33

51

Online publication year

2013

2017

2016.41

2017

2013

2017

2016.41

2017



Table 2 The summary statistics of the categorical explanatory variables

Last

author

First

author is

Last

author is

First

author

Last

author

First

author

is from

Physic

Articl

Life

Scien

Health

Scienc

al

Scienc

Groups

is

from

USA

from

top100

institute

from

top100_in

e is

OA

NIH

NSF

is

female

is

female

ces

es

USA

es

stitute

bioRxiv-

deposited

1,979

1,191

3,391

3,403

1,843

1,809

6,129

2445

942

6,193

1788

1435

Control

2,410

1,552

2,510

2,519

1,156

1,146

5,839

1863

501

6,193

1788

1435

Note:‘NIH’: Supported by grants from NIH; ‘NSF’: Supported by grants from NSF.


## 4. Results


4.1. Increasing citations to bioRxiv preprints in patents

Fig. 2a reveals a clear trend of a steady increase in the number of biorRxiv preprints cited in

patents over time, although the corresponding percentage (indicated within brackets in Fig. 2a)

remains relatively low. The observed decline in the number of patent-cited preprints in 2021 is

likely due to the lag between the publication of an article and the application for a patent, with an

average 18-month between filing a patent application and its public availability through

publication (WIPO, 2022). Consequently, the citation window ending in 2022 might not yet

provide a complete picture for patent-cited bioRxiv preprints posted in 2021 due to the time

required for patent information to become publicly available.

There is a sharp rise in the number of patent-cited bioRxiv preprints in 2020, followed by a rapid

decline in 2021 (cf. Fig. 2a). Further analysis reveals that 333 and 103 patent-cited bioRxiv

preprints in 2020 and 2021, respectively, are related to COVID-19, accounting for nearly half of

the total patent-cited bioRxiv preprints during these two years. This trend is understandable given

significant research and innovation efforts to combat the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the COVID-19

disease, which began in late 2019. The rapid communication model enabled by preprints has also

contributed to accelerating research and innovation in the field of biology. The 406 COVID-19-

related preprints are cited 920 times by 562 patents, of which 515 patents are related to COVID-

19 detection technology, vaccine technology or treatment technology. The explosive increase in

the number of bioRxiv preprints in patents suggests that COVID-19-related knowledge is being

10



transferred from preliminary research into innovations in coronavirus technologies at

unprecedented pace during the global crisis.

To differentiate the influence of COVID-19, we divided the preprints into two groups based on

their submission dates: the pre-COVID-19 era (2014–2019) and the COVID-19 era (2020). This

division aligns with the WHO’s first use of the term “2019-nCoV” to describe the novel

coronavirus on January 10, 2020 (WHO, 2020). For both groups, we collected their citing patents

with publication dates up until the end of 2022. In the first group, we identified 2,122 patent

citations from 1,097 patents referencing 839 bioRxiv preprints. In the second group, we identified

1,588 patents citations from 1,645 patents referencing 715 preprints. Fig. 2b shows the distribution

of patent citations for two groups of bioRxiv preprints, revealing a distinctly skewed pattern.

Overall, among preprints with non-zero patent citations, more than 60% received only a single

citation, while approximately 20% of preprints received at least three patent citations. This skewed

trend was especially pronounced before 2019, with over 67% of patent-cited preprints receiving

just one citation, and fewer than 16% receiving more than three patent citations.

a

b

Fig. 2. Patent citations to bioRxiv preprints. (a) Number of patent-cited preprints vs. none-patent cited papers

over year. (b) Distribution of patent citations to bioRxiv preprints 2014–2019 vs. bioRxiv preprints 2020.

Furthermore, we found that the ratio of patent-cited bioRxiv papers to the total number of

bioRxiv papers is much higher than that of patent-cited arXiv papers with a first submission year

between 2014 and 2021 (1.24% vs. 0.68%)1. This indicates that technological innovation in the

field of biology is more heavily dependent on academic research than in the fields of physics,

mathematics and computer science, which are the predominant fields covered by arXiv. However,

it is important to note that bioRxiv preprints across different categories exhibit varying levels of

patent citation performance (Fig. 3).

1 We queried Altmetric.com for mentions of arXiv preprints cited by patents between January 1, 2014 and

December 30, 2022 at the same, 16,326 mentions of 13,548 preprints across 11,050 patents for arXiv preprints.

11



a

b

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠(𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃) = 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠(𝑃𝑃𝐶) = 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑠

𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃(𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃_𝑃𝐶𝐷) = 2 × 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃!"!"−𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃!"#$_!"#&

𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃!"!"+𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑃!"#$_!"#&

𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑃𝑃𝐶(𝑃𝑃𝐶_𝑃𝐶𝐷) = 2 × 𝑃𝑃𝐶!"!"−𝑃𝑃𝐶!"#$_!"#&

𝑃𝑃𝐶!"!"+𝑃𝑃𝐶!"#$_!"#&

Fig. 3. The TOP15 categories with the highest amount of patent-cited bioRxiv papers. (a) Proportion of number

of patent-cited bioRxiv preprints (PPCP) and their patent citations (PPC) within each category. (b) Patent

citations differential (PCD).

For bioRxiv papers cited in patents during 2014 and 2022, the top four most frequently cited

categories are microbiology (15.5%), immunology (11.1%), bioinformatics (11.1%) and genomics

(9.4%) (see Fig. 3). When considering the proportion of patent citations for papers within each

category (PPC), the fields of genomics (17.4%), microbiology (15.7%), and immunology (13.3%)

stand out prominently. Furthermore, we examined the proportion of patent-cited bioRxiv preprints

(PPCP) and their associated patent citations (PPC) across two time periods: 2014–2019 and 2020.

The differentials in PPCP and PPC between the two groups were calculated using the formulas

PPCP_PD and PPC_PD, respectively (see Fig. 3). This comparative analysis reveals that the

12



microbiology field exhibits the most significant shifts in patent citations before and after 2020,

with PPCP_PD and PPC_PD values of 1.38 and 1.6, respectively, along with the highest PPCP

and PPC values among all fields. A similar trend is observed in the immunology field.

Additionally, although the pharmacology and toxicology field has relatively lower PPCP and PPC

values, it demonstrates a notable increase in both patent-cited preprints and patent citations after

2019, with PPCP_PCD and PPC_PCD values of 1.5 and 1.64, respectively. Notably, the

bioengineering filed maintains a strong connection with patents across both periods, highlighting

its consistent relevance to technological innovation.

4.2. Accelerating the knowledge transfer from science to technology

The speed at which scientific knowledge is transferred into the patenting process is a crucial

factor in understanding the time lag between scientific discovery and its corresponding invention.

This lag is typically defined as the time interval between the publication of a paper and the year it

is cited in a patent application. How long does it take for patents to recognize preprints, and does

this time lag differ when compared to journal articles? To explore this question, we examined the

time lag between patents and preprints, comparing it to the time lag for their journal versions.

Our analysis reveals a significant acceleration in the time lag between the submission of a

preprint and its subsequent citation in a patent, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic. In

this study, the time lag is measured as the duration between the preprint’s first submission date and

the patent’s filing (application) data. Additionally, we analyzed the time lapse between the

preprint’s submission date and the first patent citation date. Figure 4a illustrates the evolving

pattern of patent citations across two distinct periods, highlighting the shifting dynamics of

knowledge transfer. A striking divergence emerges when comparing preprints submitted between

2014 and 2019 with those submitted in 2020. The data indicates that preprints posted during the

COVID-19 pandemic were recognized by patents at an accelerated pace, with an average time lag

of just 10.78 months and a median of 17 months. Remarkably, over 80% of patent citations

occurred within 15 months of preprint submission. This is in stark contrast to preprints from the

2014–2019 period, which experienced a significantly longer knowledge transfer timeline. The

average and median time lags were 16.62 months and 20 months, respectively, with fewer than

45% of citations occurring within 15 months. Moreover, it took approximately 26 months for

preprints to accumulate 80% of patent citations, reflecting the relatively slower integration of

preprints into innovation pipeline in the pre-pandemic era.

We further examined the time taken for each preprint to receive its first patent citation (see

Fig. 4b). Notably, preprints can be cited by patents almost immediately after submission. For

preprints submitted prior to 2020, approximately 2.17% were cited by patents within the same

month they were posted, and over 80% received their first patent citation within 24 months of

submission. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, this timeline contracted significantly. The

13



proportion of bioRxiv preprints cited within the same month of posting rose to 6.9%,

demonstrating an increased urgency in integrating cutting-edge research into patent applications.

The acceleration is further evident in the fact that most preprints received their first patent citation

approximately 12 months after submission, with over 80% achieving this milestone within just 14

months.

This rapid reduction in time lag highlights a notable shift in how scientific knowledge is

transferred into patentable innovations during the pandemic era. Preprint communication lowers

traditional barriers in the knowledge transfer process, while the urgency of addressing the

pandemic likely motivated patent innovators to accelerate the integration of emerging research—

rapidly disseminated and freely accessible through preprints—into their inventions. This trend has

facilitated a more immediate and efficient translation of scientific research into technological and

commercial applications.

a

b

Fig. 4. Trends in patent citations to bioRxiv preprints submitted between 2014–2019 and 2020. (a) Time lag

between the filing date of patents and the submission date of preprints. (b) Time lag between the shortest filing

date of patents and the submission date of preprints.

BioRxiv preprints tend to be recognized by patents more quickly than their corresponding

journal articles. To explore this further, we analyzed patent citations to both preprints and their

corresponding journal versions. Of the 1,553 bioRxiv preprints cited by patents between 2014 and

2020, 1,054 were eventually published in journals (referred to as ‘article’ hereafter), with 797 of

these articles having online publication dates within the 2014-2020 timeframe. To gather patent

citations data, we queried Altmetric.com for patent citations to these 797 articles, covering the

period from January 1, 2014, to December 30, 2022. This search identified 3,026 mentions of 388

articles across 2,027 patents, meaning about 48.68% of the 797 articles were cited by patents. In

comparison, there were 1,545 mentions of the corresponding 388 bioRxiv preprints across 1,071

patents. The average number of patent citations for preprints and journal versions is 5.98 and 7.79

respectively, with median value of 2 and 3 respectively. Additionally, a Spearman regression


## analysis revealed a weak but statistically significant correlation of 0.33 (P<.001), between patent


14



citations to preprint and their journal articles. These findings suggest that while peer-reviewed

articles are more frequently recognized and pursued by patent applicants than their preprint

versions, it’s not always the case that an article will be commercially developed if its preprint has

been.

The aging patterns of patent citations for bioRxiv preprints and journal articles exhibit distinct

trends (cf. Fig. 5a). BioRxiv preprints experience a rapid rise in patent citations shortly after

submission, peaking around the fourth month, followed by a decline. However, they undergo a

second surge between the 10th and 13th months. In contrast, patent citations to journal versions

exhibit a relatively slower aging trend, with the peak occurring around the 13th month. The aging

rates of the first patent citations (see Fig. 5b) also reveal significant differences. Preprint versions

display a bimodal trend, while journal versions show a slower aging process, with patent citations

declining starting 13 months after publication.

Furthermore, when considering the time required for preprints to undergo peer review and be

formally published in journals, our dataset reveals an average time lag of approximately 8.18

months between the submission of preprints and the online publication of their corresponding

journal versions. These findings suggest that preprints play a crucial role in accelerating the

transfer of new knowledge to technological innovation.

a

b

Fig. 5. Trends in patent citations to bioRxiv preprints and their published journal articles. (a) Time lag between

the filing date of patents and the online publication time of articles/submission time of preprints. (b) Time lag

between the filing date of first citing patents and the online publication time of articles/submission time of

preprints.

To gain a deeper understanding of the evolving role of preprints in accelerating knowledge

transfer from science to technology and their impact on the scientific communication landscape,

we conducted a comparative analysis of the patent assignees citing the two types of papers:

bioRxiv preprints and their corresponding journal articles. Fig. 6 shows the proportion of patent

assignees citing preprints and journal articles across various types of institutions, including

companies, research institutes, universities, hospitals, government organizations to explore how

different institutions engage with the two types of scientific knowledge.

15



Fig. 6. Comparison of top 20 patent assignees citing preprints and journal articles. The two bars for each

institution represent citations of preprints (blue) and journal articles (yellow).

Overall, biotechnology companies such as 10x Genomics, Guardant Health, Seven Bridges

Genomics and Inscripta cite preprints more frequently than journal articles, suggesting that

companies in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical sectors rely more heavily on preprints to early

access latest research findings, and track cutting-edge research, which helps accelerate the pace of

innovation. While research institutes (e.g., Broad Institute) and universities (e.g., MIT, Harvard

College, and University of California) also draw substantial knowledge from preprints, they show

a strong preference for citing peer-reviewed journal articles, especially if the preprints already have

corresponding journal versions, highlighting the importance of validated and reliable peer-

reviewed science in academic and research institutions. In contrast, hospitals such as General

Hospital Corporation and Singapore Health Services focus exclusively on citing journal articles.

This reliance on peer-reviewed publications highlights the critical need for rigorous and validated


## findings in clinical and healthcare settings, where accuracy and reliability are paramount.


Government agencies, such as the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, cite both

preprints and journal articles in their patent filings, though their overall proportion of citations

remains low. This is understandable, as government bodies are not central players in the

technological innovation chain, which is often driven by private companies and research institutes.

16



4.3. Enhancing the visibility of early research results in technological innovation process

Preprints serve as an important channel for authors to rapidly disseminate their work and

enhance its rigor, with most preprint authors eventually publishing in peer-reviewed journals

(Fraser et al., 2020). But when, how and to what extent does sharing early research results, such

as preprints, influence the transfer of science knowledge to technological innovation? To address

these questions, we first investigated the aging patterns of patent citations to 797 published bioRxiv

preprints and their corresponding journal articles. We then conducted a comparative analysis of

patents citations between journal articles with and without associated bioRxiv preprints.

The patent citation trends for both bioRxiv preprints and their corresponding journal articles

(yellow curve in Fig.7), and for bioRxiv preprints alone (blue curve in Fig. 7), exhibit similar aging

patterns, with a significant decline occurring approximately 12 months after the online publication.

However, patent citations to preprints demonstrate a faster aging rate (blue curve with hollow

triangular markers in Fig.7), particularly within 10~12 months after the online publication. This

faster aging may be attributed to the early visibility and accessibility of preprints. As the

knowledge from preprints is subsequently published in journals, it continues to be transferred from

science to technology (the yellow with solid circular markers in Fig. 7), highlighting that preprints

enable the early sharing of knowledge and facilitate its transfer from science to technology.

Notably, most preprints continue to be cited even after their publication in journals (blue curve

in Fig.7). Nearly 70% of patent citations occur after the preprint has been published in a journal,

revealing that the citation trends of preprints in patents differ significantly from the citation

behavior of journal article authors toward preprints. The latter behavior exhibits a significant

decline in average citation rates following the online publication of the journal article (cf. Figure

6b in Wang, Chen, & Glänzel, 2020; Figure 5 in Fraser et al., 2020). A possible explanation for

this phenomenon might be that the limited access to journal databases, especially among firms,

including small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) without collaborators at universities or

public research institutions (Jahn et al., 2022; Leten et al., 2014). Unlike academic researchers,

who often have institutional access to subscription journals, many enterprises—especially

SMEs—do not purchase journal databases and thus cannot access academic outputs in

subscription-based journals. This difference in citation behavior underscores the unique role of

preprints in bridging the gap between academic research and industrial innovation. While

academic authors prefer to cite the journal version rather than the preprint version when both are

available (Wang, Chen, et al., 2020), industry inventors appear to value the “open access” and

“early access” of preprints. This finding emphasizes the significant role of preprints as a valuable

resource for innovation, particularly in industries where access to traditional subscription-based

academic resource is limited.

17



Fig. 7. Aging pattern of patent citations based on online publication time. The yellow curve represents patent

citations to both bioRxiv preprints and their corresponding journal articles, and the blue curve represents patent

citations exclusively to bioRxiv preprints.

The aging pattern of patent citations of both versions (the yellow curve in Fig. 7) demonstrates

that sharing early research results, such as preprints, accelerates the transfer of knowledge to

technological innovation. Moreover, the subsequent publication of peer-reviewed journal articles

continues to play a crucial role in facilitating this transformation, often having an even greater

impact. This is particularly evident when considering that the average number of patent citations

to the journal articles is significantly higher than to the corresponding preprint versions. (cf. Fig.

4a & Fig. 5 yellow curve with solid circular markers). These findings suggest that preprints

increase the visibility of early research results in the patent process, thereby strengthening the

connection between science and technology.

To further assess the impact of preprints on technological innovation, we conducted a

comparative analysis of patent citations between two groups of articles: one comprising journal

articles with a corresponding preprint version deposited in bioRxiv, referred to as ‘bioRxiv-

deposited’ articles, and the other consisting of non-deposited articles serving as a control group.

For this analysis, we utilized an open dataset originally constructed and validated by Fraser et al.

(2020), which includes 6,875 bioRxiv-deposited articles and an equal number of non-deposited

control articles. These control articles were carefully selected to be broadly similar to the bioRxiv-

deposited group, thereby minimizing the influence of article characteristics on impact

performance. This dataset provides a robust foundation for our comparative analysis of the effect

of preprints on accelerating technological innovation. Subsequently, we queried Altmetric.com to

identify patent mentions of both the bioRxiv-deposited articles and the control articles by patents

between January 1, 2014 and December 30, 2022. The results (Table 3) reveal a significant trend:

18



among the bioRxiv-deposited articles, 612 were cited in 2,218 patents, accumulating a total of

2,887 citations. In contrast, the control group, comprising 396 articles, received 1,391 citations

across 1,261 patents. This discrepancy indicates that bioRxiv-deposited articles were cited in

patents 1.55 times more frequently than those in the control group. Additionally, the bioRxiv-

deposited articles exhibited a lower frequency of zero patent citations compared to the control

group and this pattern is consistent across all years.

In the comparative analysis of the mean of patent citations per paper between bioRxiv-

deposited articles and control articles, we applied a log transformation to the patent citation counts

(LCPP) to normalize the data (Thelwall, 2017) and to reduce the influence of extremely highly

cited papers on the results. LCPP was calculated as the mean of the log-transformed patent citation

counts for all articles within each group. Then, in order to quantify and measure the patent citation

differential of bioRxiv-deposited articles versus control articles, we used the optimized function,

Impact Differential Ratio (IDR) (Wang, Chen, et al., 2020), to calculate the difference in patent

citations (P_IDR) between the two sample groups. The two formulas as:

)

𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃= 1

𝑛4 log (𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐶𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛& + 1)

&56

𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑅𝑥𝑖𝑣_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑−𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙

𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑅𝑥𝑖𝑣_𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑑+ 𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙

𝑃_𝐼𝐷𝑅= 200 ×

Where n represents the total number of articles within each group; 𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃1234526_7893:2;87  and

𝐿𝐶𝑃𝑃<3=;>3? denote the mean of the log-transformed patent citation counts for bioRxiv-deposited

articles and control articles, respectively.

The bioRxiv-deposited articles generally receiving a higher mean of patent citations per year,

as reflected in the P_IDR values (the last column of Table 3). The most notable increase occurs in

2017, suggesting that bioRxiv-deposited papers attract a significant number of early patent

citations. This observation points to a potential acceleration in the recognition and utilization of

research disseminated via preprints in patent filings. We will further investigate this hypothesis in

the following analysis using negative binomial regression.

Table 3 The description statistics of patent citations to bioRiv-deposited articles and control articles

bioRxiv-deposited

Control

Number

of

articles

P_IDR

Number of zero

patent citations

(Percentage)

Number of zero

patent citations

(Percentage)

Year

Sum of

patents

LCPP

Sum of

patents

LCPP

2013

1

1 (100%)

0

0

1 (100%)

0

0.00

/

2014

261

222 (85.06%)

378

0.229

231 (88.51%)

157

0.154

39.3

2015

772

691 (89.51%)

324

0.127

703 (91.06%)

373

0.123

2.99

19



2016

1710

1571 (91.87%)

703

0.099

1622 (94.85%)

297

0.056

56.25

2017

4131

3778 (91.45%)

1480

0.105

3922 (94.94%)

564

0.055

61.47

Total

6875

6263 (91.10%)

2885

0.110

6479 (94.24%)

1391

0.067

49.25



To ensure a fair comparison of patent citations across articles published at different times and

to mitigate potential bias in the regression analysis, we controlled the citation window to a fixed

period of 60 months. This choice is justified by two key considerations: first, the longest available

citation window for articles published in 2017 is 60 months; second, more than 80% of patent

citations occur within this period, making it a representative and meaningful timeframe for


## analysis. The results indicate that 585 bioRxiv-deposited articles were cited in 2,019 patents,


accumulating a total of 2,589 citations. In contrast, the control group, 383 articles received 1,136

citations across 1,261 patents. The distribution of patent citations for each group is highly skewed

(Fig. 8a). More than 46.9% of articles received only one citation from patents, while fewer than

31.5% of bioRxiv-deposited articles and 27.2% of control articles received at least three patent

citations.

Notably, the bioRxiv-deposited articles showed a clear advantage in patent citations following

their online publication (Fig. 8b), with the value of the paired difference (P_IDR) ranging from

10.44 to 118.88. Specifically, the cumulative P_IDR value for the 60-month citation window is

48.69, while for shorter citation windows, the values remain consistently high (49.47 for 48

months, 50.01 for 36 months, 47.85 for 24 months, and 51.09 for 12 months). To determine

whether the difference in patent citations between bioRxiv-deposited articles and control articles

is statistically significant, we conducted a nonparametric two-sided paired Wilcoxon signed-rank

test. This test is well-suited for our dataset as it does not require a normal distribution of the

differences between paired observations, making it robust for dataset with considerable number of

zero values. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed a statistically significant patent citation

advantage for bioRxiv-deposited articles over non-deposited articles across all citation windows.

Specifically, the test yielded Z-values of -6.635 (p < 0.001), -6.530 (p < 0.001), -5.902 (p < 0.001),

-4.520 (p < 0.001), and -3.317 (p < 0.001) for the 60-month, 48-month, 36-month, 24-month, and

12-month citation windows, respectively, confirming that preprint deposition is associated with a

patent citation advantage over time.

20



b

a

Fig. 8. Comparative analysis of patent citations to bioRxiv-deposited articles and control articles. (a) The

distribution of patent citations. (b) Aging pattern based on online publication time.

The above analysis demonstrates that the patent citation advantage of bioRxiv-deposited articles

emerges as early as the first year post-publication and remains consistently strong across all

citation windows. This sustained impact suggests that preprint deposition not only enhances initial

visibility but also contributes to long-term technological impact, persisting for at least five years.

By providing an accessible and early source of scientific information for inventors, the preprint

versions of journal articles enable patented technologies to incorporate cutting-edge research more

rapidly than traditionally published journal articles alone. However, as noted in our Data and


## Methods section, summary statistics for factors related to document features, publication venues


and authorship (Tables 1 and 2) reveal some key differences between bioRxiv-deposited articles

and control articles. To accurately assess the impact of a journal article’s bioRxiv-deposited status

on its patent citation advantage, it is necessary to control for other potentially influential variables

listed in Tables 1 and 2.

We performed negative binomial regression analysis on patent citation counts for the 12-

month, 24-month, 36-month, 48-month and 60-month citation window, respectively. The results

of are summarized in Table 4, with full details provided in Supplementary Tables A1–A5. The


## analysis proceeded in two stages: first, a reduced model was estimated, incorporating only the


primary predictor variable, ‘bioRxiv deposited’ status (labeled as ‘bioRxiv-deposited’ in Table 4)”.

Subsequently, a full model was fitted, incorporating all covariates detailed in Tables 1 and 2, to

account for additional factors potentially influencing the dependent variable. Incidence rate ratios

(IRR) were derived by exponentiating the regression coefficients ( exp (𝛽) ), providing an

interpretation of the relative change in the outcome (i.e., patent citation counts) for a one-unit

increase in the corresponding predictor. For instance, an IRR of 1.151 for the predictor “IF” on the

dependent variable “patent citations” indicates that for every unit increase in IF, an article is

expected to receive 1.151 times as many patent citations.


## Results (Table 4) from the reduced regression models align with those from the initial analysis,


confirming that articles deposited to bioRxiv accrue a significantly higher number of patent

citation across all time windows, with an IRRreduced model of 2.098 at 12 months and 2.073 at 60

months. Moreover, the full regression models further substantiate this finding, demonstrating that

21



even after controlling for variables associated with document features, publication venue and

authorship, the ‘bioRxiv-deposited’ status remains a significant independent predictor of patent

citations, with IRRfull model between 1.696–1.782, though slightly lower than in the reduced model.

Previous studies have demonstrated that bioRxiv papers have advantages in terms of both

citations and Altmetric counts (Fraser et al., 2020). Our results reveal that bioRxiv papers also

possess a patent citation advantage, further enhances the positive effect of preprints on

technological innovation and facilitating the transforming of scientific theories into practical

applications.

Table 4 The results of the influence of the ‘bioRxiv-deposited’ status for the patent citations from reduced and

full regression model. (see Supplementary Tables A.1–A.5 for full regression results)

bioRxiv-

deposited

Control

IRRreduced model

Std.

Error

Mean

Std.

Error

Mean

Std.

Error

12-month patent

Outcome

variables

Std.

Error

IRRfull model

(95%CI)

(95%CI)

citations

0.07

0.818

0.04

0.407

2.098***

(1.795-2.452)

0.0796

1.740***

(1.451-2.09)

0.0929

citations

0.16

1.476

0.08

0.702

2.056***

(1.844-2.291)

0.0553

1.696***

(1.492-1.927)

0.0655

24-month patent

citations

0.24

2.152

0.12

1.021

2.104***

(1.923-2.305)

0.0462

1.696***

(1.52-1.891)

0.0557

36-month patent

citations

0.32

2.727

0.15

1.311

2.081***

(1.921-2.257)

0.0411

1.754***

(1.59-1.937)

0.0503

48-month patent

citations

0.38

3.154

0.18

1.575

2.073***

(1.923-2.234)

0.0384

1.782***

(1.624-1.956)

0.0477

60-month patent

Note: *** < .001

4.4. Dissemination speed of preprints in technological innovation differs from that in scholarly

communication

The scholarly community has embraced preprints for several reasons, including early discovery,

open access, and early feedback (Maggio et al., 2018). Additionally, academic researchers use

preprints to increase their scholarly impact, such as citations (Wang, Glänzel, et al., 2020), and

social impact, such as shares on social media platforms (Fraser et al., 2020; Wang, Chen, et al.,

2020), as well as mentions in patents, which can reflect the potential innovation and economic

value of their research results.

To better understand the similarities and differences in the usage and dissemination of preprints

in technological innovation versus scholarly communication, we conducted a comparative analysis

of the aging trends of citations from both articles and patents to bioRxiv preprints (cf. Fig. 9). The

22




## results show that the average number of patent citations per preprint is significantly lower than the


number of article citations.

a

b

Fig. 9. Aging patterns of patent citations and article citations to preprints. (a) Comparison between the aging

patterns of patents citations and article citations to preprints based on preprint submission time. The dataset

includes the 520 patent-cited bioRxiv preprints that also have been received at least one citation from COCI

(OpenCitations Index of Crossref open DOI-to-DOI references, Version 11 released on 2021-09-03). (b)

Comparison between the aging patterns of patents citations and article citations to preprints based on online

publication time. The dataset includes the 291 out of the above 520 patent-cited bioRxiv preprints, which have

journal article versions.

Interestingly, the aging trends are similar between the two categories. However, there is a

notable distinction in the aging and obsolescence patterns of preprints cited in patents compared

to those cited in research articles. For instance, approximately half of the citations from patents

accumulate within 19-20 months, whereas it takes about 23 months for citations from articles to

reach the same level (cf. Fig. 9a). This suggests that the dissemination speed of preprints in

technological innovations is faster than in scholarly communication, although it is not as

widespread.

We further investigated the aging pattern of patent citations based on their online publication

dates, and compared with that of article citations to preprints. Significant differences were

observed between the two aging trends. Citations to preprints become more frequent in the months

leading up to the journal’s online publication and then sharply decline afterward (cf. Fig. 9b yellow

line). This trend aligns with previous studies (Fraser et al., 2020; Wang, Chen, et al., 2020), which

found that authors prefer to cite the journal version rather than the preprint version when both are

available. By contrast, this decline in patent citations occurs approximately 10 months later (cf.

Fig. 9b, the blue line).

In addition, 75.6 % of the 291 bioRxiv preprints were cited before their journal publication,

accounting for 55.4 % of the total 2,363 article citations. For patent citations, 40.89 % preprints

were cited before journal publication, representing 32.7 % of all 1,052 patent citations (cf. Fig. 9b

blue line). The substantial number of post-online-publication patent citations indicates an ongoing

trend where preprints continue to be cited in patents even after their journal publication. This

underscores the importance of recognizing the value of open science and the “open access” effect

23



of preprints, which extend the impact of scientific research on industrial innovation and social

economy.


## 5. Conclusion and discussion


To better understand the role of preprints in facilitating the transfer of scientific knowledge to

technological innovation within the Open Science ecosystem, we conducted a comprehensive

scientometric analysis of patent citations to bioRxiv preprints. This multi-dimensional analysis

aims to measure and assess the impact of preprints on accelerating knowledge transfer from science

to technology, highlighting the crucial role preprints play in linking scientific research to

technological advancements.

There is a consistent and notable upward trend in the number of preprints cited in patents over

time, although the overall percentage remains relatively low. Particularly significant is the sharp

increase in the number of patent-cited bioRxiv preprints in 2020, followed by a rapid decline in

2021, largely due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Preprints play a crucial role in

accelerating the transfer of new knowledge to technological innovation. The time lag between

patents and preprints is relatively short and has decreased further during pandemic.

Preprints play a critical role in accelerating innovation, while journals remain essential for

academic rigor and reliability. BioRxiv preprints tend to be recognized by patents more quickly

than their corresponding journal articles. This enhances the visibility of early research results in

patent processing, thereby strengthening the connection between science and technology. This

acceleration is facilitated by the early access and open access nature of preprints, which enable

faster innovation. Innovation in companies and some research institutes rely more heavily on

preprints, while universities and hospitals still overwhelmingly prefer journal articles, emphasizing

the role of peer-reviewed research in academic, clinical, and healthcare decision-making.

The dissemination speed of preprints in technological innovations appear to outpace that in

scholarly communication, although it is not as widespread. Differences in the usage patterns

between academic researchers and inventors are particularly evident in the post-online-publication

citations of preprints by inventors, in contrast to academic researchers. The substantial number of

post-online-publication patent citations highlights the critical role of the open science model,

particularly the “open access” effect of preprints, in extending the influence of scientific research

on industrial innovation and the economy. The patent citation advantage of bioRxiv-deposited

articles remains evident even after accounting for factors related to publication venue and

authorship.

The study enhances both the theoretical and empirical understanding of the role of preprints in

advancing scientific and technological development and in building an open innovation ecosystem.

The findings provide empirical evidence supporting the idea that open science policies, which

encouraging the sharing of early research outputs like preprints, contribute to a more efficient

24



connection between scientific research and technological innovations, thereby suggesting potential

economic benefits and substantial returns on funding. Future research could explore the quality or

economic value of patents that cite preprints by examining factors such as renewal status, citations,

and transfer rate. Such analysis would offer a more comprehensive assessment of the impact of

preprints on technological innovation. Additionally, it is crucial to distinguish whether citations

originate from patent applicants or examiners, as their distinct motivations (Higham et al., 2021).

Through such analyses, we can gain deeper insights into how preprints facilitate the transfer of

scientific discoveries into technological innovations, thereby providing strong justification for

optimizing open science policies and practices.

Acknowledgements

The first author was supported by the Social Science Planning Foundation of Liaoning Province

(grant L24CTQ002). The second author was supported by the Major Program of Chinese Ministry

of Education (grant 22JZD021), National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant L2324108).

Our gratitude also goes to the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their valuable comments.


## Appendix A



## References


Alcacer, J., & Gittelman, M. (2006). Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows: The

influence of examiner citations. The review of economics and statistics, 88(4), 774-779.

Alcácer, J., Gittelman, M., & Sampat, B. (2009). Applicant and examiner citations in U.S. patents:

An overview and analysis. Research Policy, 38(2), 415–427.

Álvarez-Bornstein, B., & Bordons, M. (2021). Is funding related to higher research impact?

Exploring its relationship and the mediating role of collaboration in several disciplines.

Journal of Informetrics, 15(1), 101102.

Ahmadpoor, M., & Jones, B. F. (2017). The dual frontier: Patented inventions and prior scientific

advance. Science, 357(6351), 583-587.

Betz, U. A., Arora, L., Assal, R. A., Azevedo, H., Baldwin, J., Becker, M. S., ... & Zhao, G. (2023).

Game changers in science and technology-now and beyond. Technological Forecasting and

Social Change, 193, 122588.

Bryan, K. A., & Ozcan, Y. (2021). The impact of open access mandates on invention. Review of

Economics and Statistics, 103(5), 954-967.

Cao, H., Lu, Y., Deng, Y., Mcfarland, D., & Bernstein, M. S. (2023, April). Breaking out of the

ivory tower: A large-scale analysis of patent citations to HCI research. In Proceedings of the

2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-24).

25



Carpenter, M. P., Cooper, M., & Narin, F. (1980). Linkage Between Basic Research Literature and

Patents. Research Management, 23(2), 30–35.

Corsini, A., & Pezzoni, M. (2023). Does grant funding foster research impact? Evidence from

France. Journal of Informetrics, 17(4), 101448.

Chen, X., Mao, J., Ma, Y., & Li, G. (2024). The knowledge linkage between science and

technology influences corporate technological innovation: Evidence from scientific

publications and patents. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 198, 122985.

Ding, C. G., Hung, W. C., Lee, M. C., & Wang, H. J. (2017). Exploring paper characteristics that

facilitate the knowledge flow from science to technology. Journal of Informetrics, 11(1), 244-

256.

Fleerackers, A., Shores, K., Chtena, N., & Alperin, J. P. (2024). Unreviewed science in the news:

The evolution of preprint media coverage from 2014–2021. Quantitative Science Studies,

Fraser, N., Mayr, P., & Peters, I. (2022). Motivations, concerns and selection biases when posting

preprints: A survey of bioRxiv authors. PLOS ONE, 17(11), e0274441.

Fraser, N., Momeni, F., Mayr, P., & Peters, I. (2020). The relationship between bioRxiv preprints,

citations and altmetrics. Quantitative Science Studies, 1(2), 1–21.

Ginsparg, P. (1994). First Steps Towards Electronic Research Communication. Computers in

Physics, 8(4), 390.

Ginsparg, P. (2011). ArXiv at 20. Nature, 476(7359), 145–147.

Glänzel, W., & Chi, P. S. (2016). Scientometrics 2.0–and beyond? Background, promises,

challenges and limitations. ISSI Newsletter, 12(3), 33-36.

Glänzel, W., & Schoepflin, U. (1995). A bibliometric study on ageing and reception processes of

scientific literature. Journal of Information Science, 21(1), 37–53.

Higham, K., De Rassenfosse, G., & Jaffe, A. B. (2021). Patent quality: Towards a systematic

framework for analysis and measurement. Research Policy, 50(4), 104215.

Huang, M. H., Huang, W. T., & Chen, D. Z. (2014). Technological impact factor: An indicator to

measure the impact of academic publications on practical innovation. Journal of Informetrics,

8(1), 241–251.

Hung, W. C. (2012). Measuring the use of public research in firm R&D in the Hsinchu Science

Park. Scientometrics, 92(1), 63–73.

Jahn, N., Klebel, T., Pride, D., Knoth, P., & Ross-Hellauer, T. (2022). Quantifying the influence

of Open Access on innovation and patents. Open Research Europe, 2, 64.

Kaiser, J. (2017). Are preprints the future of biology? A survival guide for scientists. Science, 485.

Ke, Q. (2020). Technological impact of biomedical research: The role of basicness and novelty.

Research Policy, 49(7), 104071.

Kousha, K., & Thelwall, M. (2017). Patent citation analysis with Google. Journal of the

Association for Information Science and Technology, 68(1), 48–61.

26



Krieger, J. L., Schnitzer, M., & Watzinger, M. (2024). Standing on the shoulders of science.

Strategic Management Journal, 45(9), 1670-1695..

Leten, B., Landoni, P., & Van Looy, B. (2014). Science or graduates: How do firms benefit from

the proximity of universities? Research Policy, 43(8), 1398–1412.

Li, R., Chambers, T., Ding, Y., Zhang, G., & Meng, L. (2014). Patent citation analysis: Calculating

science linkage based on citing motivation. Journal of the Association for Information

Science and Technology, 65(5), 1007–1017.

Li, D., Azoulay, P., & Sampat, B. N. (2017). The applied value of public investments in biomedical

research. Science, 356(6333), 78-81.

Li, X., Zhao, D., & Hu, X. (2020). Gatekeepers in knowledge transfer between science and

technology: an exploratory study in the area of gene editing. Scientometrics, 124(2), 1261-

1277.

Lin, Z., Yin, Y., Liu, L., & Wang, D. (2023). SciSciNet: A large-scale open data lake for the

science of science research. Scientific Data, 10(1), 315.

Maggio, L. A., Artino, A. R., & Driessen, E. W. (2018). Preprints: Facilitating early discovery,

access, and feedback. Perspectives on Medical Education, 7(5), 287–289.

Manjunath, A., Li, H., Song, S., Zhang, Z., Liu, S., Kahrobai, N., Gowda, A., Seffens, A., Zou, J.,

& Kumar, I. (2021). Comprehensive analysis of 2.4 million patent-to-research citations maps

the biomedical innovation and translation landscape. Nature Biotechnology, 39(6), 678–683.

McMillan, G. S., Narin, F., & Deeds, D. L. (2000). An analysis of the critical role of public science

in innovation: the case of biotechnology. Research policy, 29(1), 1-8.

Munari, F., Morais Righi, H., Sobrero, M., Toschi, L., Leonardelli, E., Mainini, S., Tonelli, S., &

Bruno Kessler, F. (2022). Assessing the Influence of ERC-funded Research on Patented

Inventions. https://erc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2023-01/Assessing_the_Influence_ERC-

funded_Research_Patented_Inventions.pdf

Narin, F., Hamilton, K. S., & Olivastro, D. (1997). The increasing linkage between U.S.

technology and public science. Research Policy, 26, 317–330.

Park, M., Leahey, E., & Funk, R. J. (2023). Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over

time. Nature, 613(7942), 138-144.

Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivière, V., Alperin, J. P., Matthias, L., Norlander, B., ... & Haustein, S.

(2018). The state of OA: a large-scale analysis of the prevalence and impact of Open Access

articles. PeerJ, 6, e4375.

Sternitzke, C. (2009). Patents and publications as sources of novel and inventive knowledge.

Scientometrics, 79(3), 551–561.

Tahamtan, I., & Bornmann, L. (2018). Core elements in the process of citing publications: A

conceptual overview of the literature. Journal of Informetrics, 12(1), 203-216.

27



Thelwall, M. (2017). Three practical field normalised alternative indicator formulae for research

evaluation. Journal of Informetrics, 11(1), 128–151.

Thelwall, M., & Wilson, P. (2014). Regression for citation data: An evaluation of different


## methods. Journal of Informetrics, 8(4), 963–971.


United Nations Educational, S. and C. (2021). UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science OPEN

SCIENCE. https://www.unesco.org/en/open-science/about?hub=686

van Raan, A. F. (2017). Patent citations analysis and its value in research evaluation: a review and

a new approach to map technology-relevant research. Journal of Data and Information

Science, 2(1), 13–50.

van Raan, A. F., & Winnink, J. J. (2018). Do younger Sleeping Beauties prefer a technological

prince?. Scientometrics, 114, 701-717.

Veugelers, R., & Wang, J. (2019). Scientific novelty and technological impact. Research Policy,

48(6), 1362-1372.

Wang, L., & Li, Z. (2018). Knowledge transfer from science to technology—The case of nano

medical device technologies. Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics, 3, 1-8.

Wang, Z. (2019). Driving factors in accelerating scholarly communication: A multiple-indicator

view on preprint publishing. ISSI Newsletter, 15(57), 9–15.

Wang, Z., Chen, Y., & Glänzel, W. (2020). Preprints as accelerator of scholarly communication:

An empirical analysis in Mathematics. Journal of Informetrics, 14(4), 101097.

Wang, Z., Glänzel, W., & Chen, Y. (2020). The impact of preprints in Library and Information

Science: an analysis of citations, usage and social attention indicators. Scientometrics, 125,

1403-1423.

WIPO. (2022). COVID-19-related vaccines and therapeutics: preliminary insights on related

patenting

activity

during

the

pandemic.

WIPO.

https://www.wipo.int/publications/en/details.jsp?id=4589

WHO. (2020, March 19). Infection prevention and control during health care when novel

coronavirus

(nCoV)

infection

is

suspected.

WHO.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665-331495

Yang, A. J. (2024). Unveiling the impact and dual innovation of funded research. Journal of

Informetrics, 18(1), 101480.

Yin, Y., Dong, Y., Wang, K., Wang, D., & Jones, B. F. (2022). Public use and public funding of

science. Nature Human Behaviour, 6(10), 1344–1350.

28