Vol. 8(4), pp. 116-120, May 2020

DOI: 10.14662/IJALIS2020.140

Copy © right 2020

Author(s) retain the copyright of this article

ISSN: 2360-7858

http://www.academicresearchjournals.org/IJALIS/Index.htm

International Journal of

Academic Library and

Information Science

Research



The use of social media among library professionals

and patrons: A review of literature



1Abimbola Labake Agboke* and 2Felicia Nkatv Undie



1University Library, University of Uyo, Uyo. Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria.

*Corresponding author’s E-mail: E-mail: bimbo.agboke@yahoo.com

2Department of Library and Information Science, Cross River University of Technology Calabar, Nigeria.

E – mail: nkatvfelicia@gmail.com



Accepted 29 May 2020



This paper focused on the utilization of social media by the library professionals and library users. It

provides the understanding of social media, the most popular social media platforms utilized in the

libraries. It also mentions the reasons for adoption of social media in libraries be it academic, public,

school libraries and other types of library. This is a review paper on the use of social media among

library professionals and patrons. The findings reveal the contributions of social media to the libraries.

Social media makes things easy for the library professionals and library users. It enables them to

connect, create awareness to new information, to disseminate information instantly and helps to market

the library resources and services. Therefore, it is recommended amongst others that the library

management board should encourage the use of social media in libraries.



Keywords: Use, Social media, Library patrons, Library professional, Library 2.0, Web 2.0



Cite This Article As: Agboke AL., Undie  FN (2020). The use of social media among library professionals and patrons: A

review of literature. Inter. J. Acad. Lib. Info. Sci. 8(4): 116-120




## INTRODUCTION




The use of social media has been of great interest to

researchers in economics, psychology, and other fields

like library and information science.  Currently, the use of

Internet communication tools is increasing rapidly in the

libraries. The duties of library professionals are to acquire

resources, process them and make them available to the

library users or patrons.  The introduction of   media

technology into the libraries, has changed the libraries’

daily routines to technological way of working. The

libraries’ daily routines like acquisition, cataloguing,

circulation of resources and other functions of library are

done electronically. According to International Federation

of Library Associations (IFLA), (2013). Libraries are not

piles of books anymore; the general library environment

has changed from analogue to digital. Library automation

systems have helped libraries to provide easy access to

their collections through the use of computerized library

catalogues (On-line Public Access Catalog – OPAC)

which more recently led to digital libraries. Most of the

resources in the libraries are now digitized and can be

accessed through Web that is library 2.0 or social media.

According to Thurairaj et al. (2015), social networking

sites are defined as mobile- or Internet-based social

platforms created and designed to enable users to

communicate, collaborate and share content across

contacts and communities. With the introduction of

Information and communication Technology (ICT) in

library fields, the adoption of social media has been



widespread to keep the library relevant by utilizing the

possibilities of the Web. Social media is an instrument of

communication. Social media includes networking web

sites like Facebook, MySpace, microblogging web sites

like Twitter and other media like blogs, podcasts, photos

and videos. By posting library material via social media

on library page, it can be used by the variety of locations

on the Web (Tuten, 2001).

Agboke and Undie              117



Skype and others were being used by 3 libraries.

According to Chao and Keung (2017), Facebook is one

of the most popular social networking sites worldwide,

with 1.71 billion active users in 2016.  Anwar and Zhiwei

(2019), opined that a number of social networks have

been launched and some of them are very much popular

throughout the globe like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,

WeChat, Instagram, QQ, QZone, Weibo, Twitter, Tumblr,

Telegram, Baidu Tieba, LinkedIn, LINE, Snapchat,

Pinterest, Viber etc. World Wide Worx and Fuseware

(2016), stated that the most popular social networking

sites include Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, you tube,

Snapchat and WhatsApp. Ezeani and Eke (2011),

reported that the most applicable web 2.0 technology for

library services is the social networking tools – where

librarians can interact with their users to study their needs

and give a feedback; photo sharing – where archival

pictures can be posted to users or uploaded on the library

websites…” Librarians in Nigeria are gradually utilizing

these tools to offer “on the spot” library services to users.

The use and development of various social media

services continue to increase across the world because

of the value they have in aiding human communication.



Reasons for the adoption of Social Media Network

Sites among the Librarians and the Library Patrons



For information dissemination



Social

media

provides

real-time

information

dissemination among the library professionals and library

patrons. According to Anwar and Zhiwei (2019), social

media helps the library professionals to make things easy

for them and for their readers to increase their capacity to

build good relationships among library staff and library

users. Social media enables the library professional

bodies like Nigerian Library Association (NLA), West

African Library Association (WALA) in Africa and others

to interact through internet communication.  The National

Library of Australia (NLA), ( 2010) stated that Library

supports every employee to have the opportunity to

communicate online via social media professional

networking sites, blogs and personal web sites. The

National Library of Australia uses a variety of social

media for notifying news, relevant items from collection

and library events. Facebook is used by the library to

inform the library users about major events, activities and

recent acquisitions through posting photos, videos and

links to resources about the library. Library uses

YouTube for sharing videos of many of the events held at

the library. Presentations and talks organized on different

topics by the library are disseminated via podcasts (NLA,

2010).

Furthermore, Chu and Du (2013) stated that social

media is putting a massive impact on libraries and

Kaplan and Haenlain (2010: 61) defined social media

“as a group of Internet-based applications that build on

the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0,

and that allow the creation and exchange of User

Generated Content”. They further clarify the relationship

between social media, Web 2.0, and “user generated

content”. Web 2.0 is seen as the ideological and

technological foundation of social media. User generated

content is, in turn, all the ways in which people use social

media. Web 2.0 is according to this definition a broader

concept than social media. Social media is, however,

also often used as a synonym for Web 2.0 (Anttiroiko and

Savolainen, 2011).  The important features of social

media sites where these technologies are at play are the

users’ central role, the ability to form connections

between users, and the ability to post content in different

forms (Anderson, 2007; Cormode and Krishnamurthy,

2008). The advent of social media in libraries is a shift in

paradigm from analogue to computer and smartphones

and utilization of library resources could take place

without physically present in the library. The aim of social

media in library is to keep the library relevant by

supporting utilization of the library through Web. This

study is important because it will enable the researchers

to know the popular social media networking sites utilized

by library and reasons for their adoption by library

professionals and library patrons. This review will serve

as a database for researcher writing on social media.



Popular Social media networking sites utilized by the

library



Many researchers have researched into the popular

social media used in the libraries. Ezeani and Igwesi

(2012), stated that some popularly used social media

networking sites by libraries in Nigeria to meet the

information needs of users are Facebook, MySpace,

Ning, Blogs, Wikis, LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr and

Library Thing. They enable the library professionals and

library users to collaborate and connect for information

utilization.  Olajide et al. (2017), reported that Facebook

enjoy the highest patronage among the Nigerian libraries

with all the 24 libraries used in the study using Facebook,

followed by yahoo with 7 libraries and then google+ with

6 libraries. The least patronized social media platforms

were 2go and YouTube with just 1 library using them

followed by WhatsApp which is used by 2 libraries while



118               Inter. J. Acad. Lib. Info. Sci.



information centers to promote library services and

sources. Several social media bring all the library users

community together on one spot to share their ideas and

views about their relevant and specific information. Also,

social media is providing massive space to the library

professionals to create a virtual environment to enhance

the library service providing capacity. Taylor and Francis

(2017), asserted that the use of social media is making

things easy for library professionals to reduce the gap

between library users and library resources and services.

Moreover, social media facilitates library professionals

to achieve their academics goals and objectives. In

Nigeria, Olajide et al. (2017) revealed that the

questionnaire of their research work was sent out to

librarians through the Nigerian Library Association (NLA)

online forum email and the Facebook page. A reminder

message was sent every month on the online forum and

the Facebook to achieve good response.

Social media enables the library professionals to

create an account to promote their library sources and

services. Mahmood and Richardson (2011), found that

Really Simple Syndication (RSS) was the most popular

Web 2.0 application in US academic libraries, for

publishing news, sharing items published on library blogs,

providing information on literacy instruction, information

on new acquisitions, podcasts, vodcasts, databases and

e journals. Other tools used included instant messaging

(IM) (95%), social networking sites (SNS) (87%), blogs

(85%), micro blogs (82%), social bookmarking (55%),

whilst 47% of the libraries used Flicker for sharing photos

of events.



For provision of current awareness services



Social media creates an awareness of arrival of

new

information

resources

to

the

users

without

necessarily visiting the library physically.  Gao et al.

(2012), reviewed literature about Twitter published

between 2008 and 2011. They concluded that Twitter

allowed students to participate with each other in class

(by creating an informal "back channel"), and extend


## discussion outside of class time. They also reported that


students used Twitter to get up-to-date news and connect

with professionals in their field. Kho's paper (2011), which

explores social media use for customer engagement,

substantiates the successful use of YouTube to enable

users to embed videos in other Web 2.0 tools, such as

Facebook, blogs and wikis. Flickr is a photo sharing

website which allows users to store, sort, search and post

photographs and to create discussion groups. Si et al.

(2011), comment that tools such as wikis and RSS feeds

are mostly used for searching for information and

following current events respectively.

Through social media, instant interaction is made

possible. Makori, (2011:34) emphasized that instant

interaction between a librarian and the user is one of the

many reasons academic libraries have chosen to

integrate social media tools into their daily work. Social

media tools such as YouTube, MySpace, Facebook,

Twitter and Flickr are popular for online collaboration,

communication and sharing of information among

librarians and instant messaging (IM) provides the basis

for librarians to interact with their patrons (Munatsi 2010:

255). Social media encourages collaborations among the

librarians. Librarians are now able to communicate

instantly with users by remotely providing assistance

such as virtual reference services (Stephens 2006) and

to offer current information to students and researchers

(Xu et al. 2009). That is, instead of arranging face-to-face

orientation programs, libraries are increasingly using RSS

feed readers, podcasts and recorded videos to deliver

audio and video commentary and instruction to users

remotely.



For Marketing and promotion of   information

resources and services available in the libraries



Libraries are users oriented, be it academic libraries,

special libraries, school libraries and others and the aim

of any library is for users’ satisfaction. Libraries can

achieve this through the use of social media.  This is in

line with the view of Olajide et al. (2017) that social

media’s presence is almost everywhere and the vision of

the library within the last few years has been that library

services should go to users not necessarily that users

should come physically to the library. Therefore, libraries

adopted social media has marketing and publicity tools in

the libraries. Hendrix et al. (2009), stated that libraries are

using Facebook mainly to market the library, push out

announcement to library users, post photos, provide chat


## reference and have a presence in the social network. In


another work by Rogers (2012), on web 2.0 application

used by libraries to promote and market services, the

librarians’ response showed that 70.7% use blog, 66.7%

use social networking sites, and instant messaging was

50.7% as the most commonly used ones.

In developed countries libraries are using latest trends

to market their services. United States (U.S.) libraries of

all types are increasingly using social media tools and

Web 2.0 applications to connect with library users and to

make

library

programs

and

services

accessible

(American Library Association ALA, 2001). Library of

Congress is also utilizing social media for marketing its

services and to interact with its online users. Library uses

Blogging, Flickr, YouTube, Social Networking, iTunes and

Twitter

for

its

different

services

(Braziel,

2009).

Harinarayana and Raju (2010), reiterated that social

media technologies are becoming increasingly popular

for use in academic libraries’ marketing strategies. Social

media tools have assisted university libraries in the



promotion of information services to their patrons.

Kronqvist – Berg (2014), Studied the implementation of

social media into the libraries. She reported that the main

reason for introducing Library 2.0 services was, to

develop the library (37.8% of n=82) and is especially

supported by library managers. This option was followed

by to market the library (22.0%) and to keep the library

relevant (22.0%). The option with least support among

the respondents was to give the library a modern

impression (13.4%). Avid social media users saw the

implementation of Library 2.0 mainly as a way to develop

the library, followed by marketing possibilities, and

keeping the library relevant. Social media enable

communication,

instant

messaging,

connection,

information

sharing

and

interactions

between

the

librarians, library professional bodies and library users.




## CONCLUSION / RECOMMENDATIONS




Social media has contributed to the development of

libraries in various ways. It makes the library relevant in

this digital age.  Social media is used as marketing and

promotional tools to get the users informed of the

available resources and services in the library. The

library professionals’ bodies connect and collaborate

through the use of social media. Library professionals

disseminate information to the users through social

media network. They can post recent book available in

the library through Facebook, Twitter, blog and others

to users. Date dues can be posted through WhatsApp,

LinkedIn, Twitter and others. Inter library loans services

is made possible through social media sites like Flickr

and Library Thing.

Considering the numerous functions of social media

in library practices, the following recommendations

were made:  All libraries should adopt the use of social

media in their daily activities. Furthermore, Librarians

should create social media platforms for their users to

enable them communicate with the library users or

patrons. Also, the Library management board should

make provision for free browsing systems for all the

users and library professionals. More desk top

computers and laptops should be provided into the

libraries by the library management. Workshops and

seminar on the use of social media should be

conducted for the library professionals and patrons.




## REFERENCES




American Library Association (ALA) (2001). Libraries

making good use of social media and Web 2.0

applications.

Retrieved

from

http://www.ala.org/news/mediapresscenter/americaslibr

aries/socialnetworking

Agboke and Undie              119



Anderson, P. (2007). What is web 2.0? Ideas,

technologies and implications for education. JISC

Technology & Standards Watch. London: JISC.

Retrieved

from

http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/techwatch/tsw0

701b.pdf

Anttiroiko, A.V., & Savolainen, R. (2011). Towards Library

2.0: The adoption of Web 2.0 technologies in public

libraries. Libri, 61(2): 87-99. doi:  10.1515/libr.2011.008.

Anwar, M. & Zhiwei, T.  (2019).   Social media makes

things possible for Librarians: A Critical Note.  Amer.

Jour.

of

Biomed.

Sci.

&

Res.

6(1)

AJBSR.MS.ID.000985.

DOI:

10.34297/AJBSR.2019.06.000985.

Braziel, L. (2009). Social media marketing example #12:

Library of Congress. Retrieved

from

http://www.ignitesocialmedia.com/social-media-

examples/social-media-marketing-example-library-of-

congress

Chao, C. & Keung, N. (2017). Predicting social capital on

Facebook: The implications of use intensity, perceived

content

desirability,

and

Facebook-enabled

communication practices’. Comp. in Human Behav. 72:

259–268. dl.acm.org/doi/10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.058.

Chu, S.K.W & Du, H. S. (2013). Social networking tools

for academic libraries. Jour. of librnship and info. Sci.

45(1): 64-75.

Cormode,

G.,

&

Krishnamurthy,

B.

(2008).

Key

differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0. First

Monday, 13(6). doi:10.5210%2Ffm.v13i6.2125.

Ezeani, C. N, & Igwesi.U. (2012). Using social media for

dynamic

library

service

delivery:

The

Nigeria

experience. Libr. Phil. and Prac. (e-journal). 814.

https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/814

Ezeani, C. N., & Eke, H. N. (2011). Transformation of

Web 2.0 into Lib 2.0 for driving access to knowledge by

academic libraries in Nigeria. In the 48th National

Conference and Annual General meeting of the

Nigerian

Library

Association

Theme:

Knowledge

management for national development. Ibadan: HEBN

Publishers, p.80

Gao, F., Luo, T., & Zhang, K. (2012). Tweeting for

Learning:

A

Critical


## Analysis


of

Research

on

Microblogging in Education Published in 2008-2011.

British Jour. of Educational Tech. 43: 783-801.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01357.x

Harinarayana, N. & Raju V. (2010). Web 2.0 features in

university library web sites. The Electronic Library,

28(3): 69-88.

Hendrix, D; Chiarella, C; Hasman, L; Murphy, S. &

Zafron, M.L. (2009). Use of Facebook in Academic

Health Sciences Libraries. Jour. of the Med. Libr. Assn.

9 (1): 44-47.

International Federation of Library Associations and

Institutions (IFLA). (2013). Bridging the Digital Divide:

making the world’s cultural and scientific heritage



Rogers, C.R. (2012). Social media, libraries and web 2.0:

How American libraries are using new tools for public

relations to attract New Users- Fourth annual survey

November

2011.

Available

at

dc.statelibrary.sc.gov/bitstream/handle/10827/7271/SC

SL_Social_Media_Libraries_2011.pdf?sequence=1&is

Allowed.

Si, L., Shi, R. & Chen, B. (2011). An investigation and


## analysis of the application of Web 2.0 in Chinese


university libraries. The Elect. Libr., 29(5): 651-668.

Stephens, M. (2006). Exploring Web 2.0 and libraries.

Libr. Tech. Rep. 42(6): 8-14.

Taylor & Francis (2017). How libraries are applying social

media. Content & Communications Team, USA.

Thurairaj, S., Hoon, E.P., Roy, S.S., Fong, P.W., Tunku,

U., Rahman, A. et al., (2015). ‘Reflections of students’

language usage in social networking sites: Making or

marring academic English’, University Tunku Abdul

Rahman 13(4):302–316.

Tuten, T.L. (2001). Advertising 2.0 - Social media

marketing in a Web 2.0 World. Book review.

Retrieved

May

9,

2012,

from

http://blogcritics.org/books/article/book-review-

advertising-

20-social-media/

World Wide Worx & Fuseware, (2016). South African

social media landscape 2016, Retrieved  09 May 2017,

from

http://www.worldwideworx.com/wp-

content/uploads/

2016/11/Exec-Summary-Social-

Media-2016.pdf.

Xu, C., Ouyang, F. and Chu, H. (2009). The academic

library meets Web 2.0: applications and implications.

Jour. of Academic Libranship, 35(4): 324-331.

120               Inter. J. Acad. Lib. Info. Sci.



accessible to all, [online] IFLA/UNESCO Manifesto for

Digital Libraries. Available at: http://ifla.org

Kaplan, A. M. & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world,

unite! The challenges and opportunities of social

media.

Business

Horizons,

53(1):

59-68.

doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003

Kho, N. D. (2011). Social media in libraries: keys to

deeper engagement. Information Today, 28(6), 1, 31-

32.

Kronqvist – Berg, M. (2014). Social media and public

libraries: Exploring Information activities of library

professionals and users. Abo: Åbo Akademi University

Press.

Mahmood, K. & Richardson, J. (2011). Adoption of Web

2.0 in US academic libraries: a survey of ARL library

websites Program. 45 (4): PP.365 – 375.

Makori, E.O. (2011). Bridging the information gap with the

patrons in university libraries in Africa: the case for

investments in Web 2.0 systems. Library Review,

61(4): 340-350.

Munatsi, R. 2010. Implementation of library 2.0 services

in African academic and research libraries: need for

fundamental

rethink.

[Online].

http://www.scecsal.org/conferences/2010/spapers2010.

pdf.

National Library of Australia (NLA). (2010). National

Library of Australia publishes social media guidelines.

http://web.resourceshelf.com/go/resourceblog/62891

Olajide, A. A, Otunla, A.O. & Omotayo, O.A. (2017).  How

libraries are using social media:

Nigeria perspective. International Jour. of Digital Libr.

Ser. 7 (3): 79 – 94.  IJODLS | Geetanjali Res. Pub.

www.ijodls.in   ISSN:2250-1142 (Online),

View publication stats