The Effect of Gender Diversity on Scientific Team Impact:

A Team Roles Perspective

Yi Zhao1, Yongjun Zhu2,3, Donghun Kim4, Yuzhuo Wang1, Heng Zhang5, Chao Lu6, Chengzhi

Zhang7


## 1. School of Management, Anhui University, Hefei, China



## 2. Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea



## 3. Center for Science of Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea



## 4. School of Information Management, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China



## 5. School of Information Management, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China



## 6. Business School, Hohai University, Nanjing, China



## 7. Department of Information Management, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,


Nanjing, China


## Abstract: The influence of gender diversity on the success of scientific teams is of


great interest to academia. However, prior findings remain inconsistent, and most

studies operationalize diversity in aggregate terms, overlooking internal role

differentiation. This limitation obscures a more nuanced understanding of how gender

diversity shapes team impact. In particular, the effect of gender diversity across

different team roles remains poorly understood. To this end, we define a scientific team

as all coauthors of a paper and measure team impact through five-year citation counts.

Using author contribution statements, we classified members into leadership and

support roles. Drawing on more than 130,000 papers from PLOS journals, most of

which are in biomedical-related disciplines, we employed multivariable regression to

examine the association between gender diversity in these roles and team impact.

Furthermore, we apply a threshold regression model to investigate how team size

moderates this relationship. The results show that (1) the relationship between gender

diversity and team impact follows an inverted U-shape for both leadership and support

groups; (2) teams with an all-female leadership group and an all-male support group

achieve higher impact than other team types. Interestingly, (3) the effect of leadership-

group gender diversity is significantly negative for small teams but becomes positive

and statistically insignificant in large teams. In contrast, the estimates for support-group

gender diversity remain significant and positive, regardless of team size.

Keywords: Gender diversity, Team roles, Leadership diversity, Team impact

 Corresponding author

Email addresses: yizhao93@ahu.edu.cn (Yi Zhao), zhu@yonsei.ac.kr (Yongjun Zhu),

dhkim91@yonsei.ac.kr

(Donghun

Kim),

wangyuzhuo@ahu.edu.cn

(Yuzhuo

Wang),

zh_heng@ccnu.edu.cn (Heng Zhang), luchao91@hhu.edu.cn (Chao Lu), zhangcz@njust.edu.cn

(Chengzhi Zhang)




## 1. Introduction


A comprehensive examination of teamwork cannot overlook the significant role of

gender. From the perspective of social construction, gender is a social identity that

affects thoughts, perception, and worldview (Lindsey 2015). Gendered aspects of this

social identity can influence researchers’ motivational dispositions and cognitive

processes (McLeod 2005). Consequently, this guides researchers’ behaviors, actions

and perceptions. Previous studies have shown that gender differences manifest across

many aspects of scientific activities, including research methods and topic selection

(Zhang et al. 2023; Thelwall et al. 2019; Wullum Nielsen & Börjeson 2019),

collaborative preferences (Boschini & Sjögren 2007), and the division of labor in

scientific teamwork (Larivière et al. 2020). For example, in the field of tourism, Nunkoo

et al. (2020) indicated that male researchers more likely to adopt quantitative methods

to address problems, whereas female researchers tend to prefer qualitative approaches.

Based on self-reported contribution statements in publications, Larivière et al. (2020)

further showed that male scholars are more often engaged in conceptual work in teams,

while female scholars more frequently conduct empirical tasks. When male and female

scholars collaborate, their gender-differentiated beliefs, experiences, and perspectives

can be combined to enhance team performance and efficiency (Nielsen et al. 2018).

Over the past few decades, the increased participation of women in science has

promoted the gender diversity of scientific teams (Huang et al. 2020). A recent study

by Yang et al. (2022) revealed that the proportion of gender-heterogeneous teams in

medicine increased from 60% to 70% between 2000 and 2019. The impact of gender

diversity on the performance of scientific teams has garnered extensive scholarly

attention. Different gender categories may offer distinctive worldviews, perspectives

and cognitive approaches (Wullum Nielsen & Börjeson 2019). Compared with gender-

homogenous teams, gender-diverse teams have greater potential to pool a wider range

of knowledge, beliefs, and experiences, thereby fostering innovation and creativity

(Campbell et al. 2013). Nevertheless, some studies reached the opposite conclusion

(Joshi 2014; Stvilia et al. 2011). For instance, Wullum Nielsen and Börjeson (2019)

analyzed more than 25,000 article teams in management and found that gender diversity

has no significant effect on team outcomes. These mixed findings suggest that further

investigation into the potential association between gender diversity and team

performance is necessary.

Although a few scholars still conduct independent research without collaboration,

teamwork has become the dominant mode of producing scientific innovation in

contemporary science (Wuchty et al. 2007). This shift can be attributed to several

factors, including the increasing complexity of research questions (Zhao et al. 2022),

the growing specialization of scientists (Jones 2009), reduced travel costs (Catalini et

al. 2020), and advances in communication technology (Katz & Martin 1997; Naik et al.

2023). Collectively, these factors have enable teams not only to thrive but also to expand

in size (Liu et al. 2020). The ever-expanding team size in science has fostered a more

specialized division of labor. To our knowledge, most studies on the association



between gender diversity and scientific performance examine teams as a whole, often

overlooking the roles undertaken by individual members. Yet research suggests that

diverse team compositions can enhance the generation of original and valuable ideas,

these benefits may diminish during idea selection and implementation (Stahl et al.

2009). Because different roles within scientific teams involve different research tasks,

it is important to consider how gender diversity within specific roles influences team

impact. Furthermore, although prior studies have recognized team size as a vital factor

affecting team innovation (Wu et al. 2019; Milojevic 2014), it is still unclear whether

team size moderates the relationship between role-specific gender diversity and team

impact. To fill these research gaps, we propose two questions in this study:

RQ1: How does gender diversity within different team roles affect the team’s impact?

RQ2: Can team size moderate this relationship?

The contributions of this paper are primarily manifested in three aspects. First, we

unpack the distinct effect of gender diversity in two specific roles (i.e., leadership and

support roles) on team impact. Second, we identify team size as a key moderator in the

association between gender diversity in leadership groups and team impact. Third, our


## findings offer valuable insights for practitioners and team leaders regarding the


construction of high-impact teams.


## 2. Literature review


In this section, we review four streams of literature relevant to our study. First, we

discuss the role of gender homophily in research team formation. Second, we review

the literature on scientific teams and team roles. Third, we summarize existing studies

on the relationship between role-specific gender diversity and scientific team

performance. Finally, we review research on how team size may moderate the

relationship between gender diversity and team impact.

2.1 Role of gender homophily in research team formation

Homophily principle suggests similarity serves as a basis for interpersonal

connection (McPherson et al. 2001). People are naturally attracted to those who

resemble them in terms of background, interests, worldview, and beliefs, because

similarity is often perceived as reflecting one’s ideal self (Byrne et al. 1986). As a result,

personal networks tend to be homogeneous with respect to sociodemographic and

personal traits such as gender, wealth, education, and age (Kwiek & Roszka 2021).

The formation of research teams follows similar mechanisms. In academia, team

formation is a autonomy process, in which scholars decide whether to collaborate based

on perceived benefits and costs (McDowell & Smith 2007). Collaboration is pursued

when it is expected to yield greater benefits than working alone. Consequently, the

composition of research teams reflects individual choices, shaped by anticipated gains

from collaboration and the coordination costs involved (Boschini & Sjögren 2007).



Gender homophily within teams may facilitate smoother communication but can

also restrict scholars’ worldviews, values, and knowledge to a narrower domain

compared with gender-diverse teams. As a result, many male scholars tend to

collaborate with other men, while many female scholars prefer to collaborate with other

women(Prakash et al. 2024). At the same time, some scholars actively seek

collaborations with colleagues of the opposite gender. A large-scale study by Kwiek

and Roszka (2021) found that female scholars are more likely to participate in mixed-

gender teams, while male scholars tend to work in all-male teams.

2.2 Scientific teams and team roles

Teamwork is becoming more common and has become the primary way to drive

the production of new knowledge in modern science (Wu et al. 2019). The division of

labor in scientific research is becoming progressively more refined, which is reflected

in the increasingly differentiated roles within research teams (Melero & Palomeras

2015; Hamilton et al. 2003; Lee et al. 2015). Based on the author-task bipartite network,

Lu et al. (2020) divided team roles into three types: specialists, team-players and

versatiles. Th authors found that versatiles are associated with funding and supervision.

Similarly, Robinson-Garcia et al. (2020) adopted archetypal analysis to categorize

scientists into distinctive roles and suggested that junior scholars are typically involved

in specialized and supporting roles, while late-career scholars are often engaged in

leadership and support roles. Utilizing the authorship contribution statement, Zhao et

al. (2024) identified the authors who undertake conceiving ideas as thought leaders in

scientific teams.

The order of authors in a byline has often been used to infer team roles in science-

of-science studies. Despite disciplinary differences in authorship norms, most studies

suggest that the first and last authors contribute more substantially than middle authors

and can therefore be regarded as occupying leadership roles (van Leeuwen 2008).

However, ghost authorship and honorary authorship can substantially bias such

inferences (Pallotti et al. 2025). Scholars at different career ages may possess different

leadership skills (Mumford et al. 2007). Xu et al. (2024) thus defined team leaders based

on career age. Nevertheless, the accuracy of career-age measures in scientometrics

relies on effective name disambiguation, and the disambiguation of mainstream

bibliometric data remains a significant challenge, particularly for East Asian scholars

(Kim et al. 2021). Academic rank may also serve as a useful indicator of leadership

roles, as full professors often assume leadership positions in academic teams (Evans et

al. 2013). However, large-scale data on academic ranks are difficult to obtain. Therefore,

in this study, we relied on author contribution statements to determine roles in scientific

teams.



2.3 Gender diversity of different team roles and scientific

team performance

The literature on gender diversity and its influence on academic team performance

from the perspective of division of labor remains scarce, and prior findings on this

relationship are inconsistent. Some studies argued that team performance benefits from

gender diversity (Maddi & Gingras 2021; De Saá-Pérez et al. 2017). For example,

Campbell et al. (2013) revealed that articles published by mix-gender teams received

34% more citations than those authored by same-gender teams. Yang et al. (2022) found

that papers produced by gender-heterogeneous teams are significantly more impactful

and novel than those produced by gender-homogeneous teams. However, other

empirical work suggests that gender diversity have no discernible effect on team

performance (Wullum Nielsen & Börjeson 2019). For instance, Stvilia et al. (2011)

explored the influence of team diversity and network characteristics on team

productivity, discovering that gender diversity had a negative but non-significant effect.

Joshi (2014) analyzed 60 teams across science and engineering, and reached a similar


## conclusion to those of Stvilia et al. (2011).


A potential explanation for these inconsistent findings lies in the gender distribution

across disciplines, which constrains the possible gender composition of teams. For

example, Ghiasi et al. (2015) reported that female scholars account for only 20% of

authorship in Engineering. Using publications indexed in the Web of Science between

1900 and 2016, Huang et al. (2020) found that the proportion of female scholars was as

low as 15% in Mathematics and Physics, but reached approximately 30% in Health

science, Political science, and Phycology. Similar disadvantages have been observed in

other fields. Zhang et al. (2025) showed that woman accounted for only 22.2% of

authorship in the Natural Language Processing. Based on more than 6.6 million

publications in the medical sciences, Yang et al. (2022) showed that female’s

participation increased from 38% to 46% between 2000 and 2019, but gender-

heterogeneous teams remain underrepresented relative to expectations. Different

disciplines exhibit distinct patterns in women’s participation and the gender

composition of teams. Therefore, further research is needed to investigate the potential

influence of team gender diversity on the performance of scientific teams.

In the field of science of team science, there is a limited body of quantitative literature

examining the relationship between gender diversity in different team roles and team

impact. Studies in other domains have yielded mixed results, yet these studies provide

valuable insights. A growing number of literature suggests that team performance

benefits from gender diversity in leadership roles (Saeed et al. 2023). For example,

Lyngsie and Foss (2016) found a positive relationship between gender diversity in

leadership group (i.e., top management groups) and innovation outcomes in established

firms, although this positive effect is weakened in firms with a high proportion of

female employees. Similarly, Lafuente and Vaillant (2019) used data from all financial

firms in Costa Rican industry, highlighted a positive association between gender



balance in board configurations and economic performance.

According to information processing theory, diverse teams have a significant

advantage in addressing complex problems because they are more likely to access a

broad range of knowledge (Phillips et al. 2013). In contrast, other scholars argue that

gender diversity in leadership can be detrimental to team performance (Andres et al.

2005). For instance, Lee and Chung (2022) investigated leadership-group gender

diversity on firm innovation and found that greater gender diversity reduced teams’

innovation impact. According to social categorization theory, leaders are inclined to

classify themselves into subgroups based on demographic characteristics, which may

foster cognitive biases and intra-team conflict (Phillips & O'Reilly 1998). Consequently,

gender-diverse leadership teams may experience low performance compared with more

homogeneous ones.

Scientific teams differ substantially from business teams. The primary goal of

scientific teams is to solve complex problems and generate highly innovative

knowledge, and their work is usually knowledge intensive. By contrast, business teams

typically aim to achieve financial performance, and their work is more diverse,

encompassing mental labor, physical labor, and hybrid tasks (Börner et al. 2010;

Hoogendoorn et al. 2013). In addition, scientific teams have several distinctive

characteristics compared with business teams (Whitley 2000). Scientific collaborations

are largely voluntary and grounded in mutual interests, and scholars have considerable

autonomy to create, maintain, restructure, or dissolve their teams. In contrast, business

teams are generally more structured and goal oriented, with leadership and decision-

making authority often centralized. Members of business teams may have limited

autonomy in forming or dissolving teams (Wang & Hicks 2015; Devine et al. 1999).

Moreover, scientific collaboration tends to be fluid and evolve with the project, while

long-term partnerships are relatively rare. (Zhu et al. 2024; Wang & Hicks 2015).

Business teams, particularly top management teams, are comparatively stable (Liao et

al. 2023). Given these differences, further investigation into the influence of gender

diversity on team impact in academia becomes particularly necessary.

Taken together, current empirical evidence on the relationship between team gender

diversity and team performance in academia is equivocal. The existing literature largely

operationalizes diversity in aggregate manners, focusing on overall gender diversity

and overlooking the critical role-based mechanisms. Furthermore, although gender

diversity within leadership groups (e.g., top management teams) has been recognized

as important in the business sector, it remains unclear how gender diversity across

different team roles in scientific field relates to team impact.

2.4 Team size and team performance

Large teams have both advantages and drawbacks for team performance. A stream

of studies has shown that larger and more diverse teams are more likely to produce

innovative and impactful outcomes (Wu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2022). By drawing on

a broader pool of resources, large teams increase their chance of developing new and

useful ideas (Stewart 2016; Krammer & Dahlin 2023). They also tend to receive more



citations from the scientific community (Wang et al. 2017). One possible reason is that

larger team can more effectively disseminate their research outputs (Krammer & Dahlin

2023). However, other literature emphasizes the potential “process loss” associated

with large teams, which may negatively affect team performance (Cummings et al.

2013). In particular, managing and coordinating the wide range of resources required

by large teams can be challenging (Liu et al. 2022). Additionally, larger teams may be

more prone to free-riding (He 2012), lower team cohesion (Manners 1975), and

increased emotional conflict (Amason & Sapienza 1997).

Team size may moderate the relationship between gender diversity in different team

roles and team performance. The upper echelons theory posits that the characteristics

of top management teams play a crucial role in decision-making (Hambrick & Mason

1984). Similarly, the characteristics of team leaders in science are critical for shaping

scientific outputs. Existing literature suggests that team diversity tends to enhance team

performance on complex problems rather than simple ones (Chatman et al. 2019). In

small teams, team structure are typically simpler and flatter than in large teams (Xu,

Wu, et al. 2022). If leadership groups in small teams experience intergroup bias and

subgroup categorization, with leaders aligning strongly with their respective ingroups,

this may lead to conflict, distrust, and dislike among subgroup leaders (Homan et al.

2020). Such processes can undermine overall team performance. In contrast, larger

teams tend to be more diverse (Yang et al. 2022), and diverse leadership groups may

have greater capacity to manage and lead such teams, which can facilitate team

innovation (van Knippenberg & Schippers 2007; Homan et al. 2020). Therefore, we

speculate that the positive effect of leadership diversity is likely to be less pronounced

in small teams but more significant in large teams.

While numerous studies have examined how team size influences team performance,

little is known about whether it moderates relationship between role-specific gender

diversity and team impact.

3  Data

In this section, the detailed data collection and data processing approach will be

introduced.

3.1 Data collection

The dataset used in this study was obtained from PLOS, which is a prominent open-

access publisher in the scientific community. According to PLOS publisher’s

publication policy1, each author’s contributions to the study should be described in the

article. This policy provides an opportunity to explore the influence of gender diversity

on scientific team performance from the perspective of team roles. To acquire the author

1 https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/authorship



contribution statements and other metadata, including affiliations and author names, we

collected 161,193 full-text research articles from PLOS journals published between

2007 and 2015 in JATS-standard XML format2. Due to inconsistencies in the taxonomy

of contribution statements before and after 2016 (Lu et al. 2020), our analysis was

restricted to articles published between 2007 and 2015.

3.2 Data processing

Figure 1 presents an illustrative example and overall flowchart of data collection

and processing. Figure 1A provides a representative example of the data processing

procedure, which can be divided into four main components: (1) author-task pairs

extraction, (2) author gender inference, (3) team roles assignment, and (4) discipline

assignment. Figure 1B outlines the detailed steps involved in dataset construction.

Figure 1 Illustrative example and flowchart of data collection and processing



(1) Author-task pairs extraction

Figure 2A shows an example of author contribution statement in JATS-standard

XML format. The author-task pairs extraction proceeded in a two-step process. First,

we adopted regular expressions to parse the author contribution statement embedded

between the start tag <fn fn-type=“con” id=“ack1”> and the end tag </fn>. The parsed


## results are presented in Figure 2B. Second, we utilized string matching to match the


authors’ full names in the authorship with their initials from the author-task pairs (see

2 https://jats.nlm.nih.gov/publishing/



Figure 2C). We retained only those articles for which all authors’ contribution

statements were fully parsed, and where their full names and initials were successfully

linked, yielding 159,484 articles. Since the focus of this study is on team-level analysis,

we further excluded 1,506 solo-authored articles, leaving 157,978 articles for analysis.

Figure 2 The author–task pairs of a sample article

3



(2) Author gender inference

Name-based gender inference has been widely applied in studies of team science.

In this study, we used Genderize.io

4 to infer gender for each scholar based on their first

name (Madsen et al. 2022). Huang et al. (2020) reported an overall accuracy of 94.25%,

suggesting that the tool is reasonably reliable. However, it should be noted that the

Genderize.io is limited to binary gender categories and is not intended to address the

issue of nonbinary gender identities. Using this tool, 93.05% of authors were assigned

a gender, as shown in the gender inference statistics in Table 1. Another limitation of

Genderize.io is its relatively poor performance with Chinese and Korean first names.

Following widely accepted practice (Huang et al. 2020), we excluded the authors with

60 most common Chinese5 and Korean6 surnames. After gender inference, authors

whose gender could not be determined were excluded from the dataset. Specifically, if

an article had three authors, two identified as male and one with undetermined gender,

the article was retained, but the undetermined author was excluded from the analysis

(Maddi & Gingras 2021), leaving 149,587 articles. Articles were preserved only if the

3 https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.0050023

4 https://genderize.io/our-data

5 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_common_Chinese_surnames

6 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Korean_family_names



gender of at least two authors could be inferred. As a result, the dataset consisted of

137,787 articles.

Table 1 Gender distribution of authors

Inferred gender

Percentage (%)

Number of distinct authors

Male

55.00%

343,033

Female

38.05%

237,356

Unknown

6.95%

43,384



(3) Team roles assignment

Drawing on self-reported contribution statements, Xu, Wu, et al. (2022)

categorized authors into different team roles. Specifically, they adopted the Louvain


## method to cluster the co-occurrence network of tasks into three groups: leadership,


direct support and indirect support. The mapping scheme between team roles and tasks

is summarized in Table 2.

Table 2 Mapping between team roles and tasks

No.

Team roles

Tasks

1

Leadership

“conceive”, “supervise”, “design”, “lead”, “coordinate”, “write”,

and “interpret”.

2

Direct support

“help”, “assist”, “prepare”, “develop”, “collect”, “generate”,

“purify”, “carry”, “do”, “perform”, “conduct” and “analyze”.

3

Indirect support

“participate”, “provide”, “contribute”, “comment”, “discuss”

and “edit”.

According to the mapping scheme in Table 2, each author could be assigned to one

or more of the three roles based on their reported tasks. Using this scheme,

approximately 98% of authors were assigned at least one role. Because the mapping

scheme was developed from the 25 most common tasks (see Table 2), authors

performing tasks outside this set could not be directly mapped to any of the three roles.

To address this limitation, we designed a supplementary strategy. Specifically, we first

converted all tasks into a 384-dimensional vector using a pre-trained model


## 7. We then


calculated the cosine similarity between the unlabeled tasks and the 25 labeled tasks

(Salton & McGill 1983). Finally, each unlabeled task was assigned the role of the most

similar labeled task. In practice, the distinction between direct support and indirect

support is often ambiguous, we thus merge these categories into a single support role.

Team members could simultaneously serve in leadership and support roles, in which

case they were classified into both groups. Since our study focuses on the roles of

leadership and support in shaping team impact, 3,929 article teams lacking either role

were excluded from the dataset. After this step, the dataset comprised 133,858 articles.

(4) Discipline assignment

To control for discipline-invariant factors in the regression analysis, it was

necessary to assign a discipline to each PLOS article. We utilized discipline

classification information from the in-house Web of Science (WoS) database, owned by

7 https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2



Dr. Vincent Larivière, to determine the discipline of each article in our dataset, as done

in our previous study (Lu et al. 2019). The classification system used for this dataset is

derived from the subject classification system of the National Science Foundation


## 8. The


specific method employed involved using the category to which the majority of the


## references from PLOS articles belonged as the discipline label for these articles. For


instance, suppose article A has 40 references, and the distribution of discipline

categories from these 40 references’ journals is counted as {𝑆1, 𝑆2, … }, the discipline

𝑆𝑖 containing the most references was identified as the discipline label for article A.

After matching, 119,808 articles were assigned to a discipline. Table 3 presents the

disciplinary distribution of our dataset. To retain 14,049 the articles without discipline

assignments and maintain a larger dataset, we categorized them under a single group,

labeled “other discipline”, in the subsequent analysis. Consequently, the final dataset

comprised 133,858 articles.

Table 3 Number of publications by discipline

Discipline

# of publications

Ratio (%)

Clinical Medicine

54,020

40.36

Biomedical Research

43,218

32.29

Unmatched

14,049

10.50

Biology

11,293

8.44

Mathematics

2,909

2.17

Psychology

2,809

2.09

Earth and Space

1,332

1.00

Health

1,038

0.77

Social Sciences

812

0.61

Physics

811

0.61

Engineering and Technology

715

0.53

Chemistry

488

0.36

Professional Fields

349

0.26

Humanities

14

0.01

Arts

1

0.00

Total

133,858

100

We also present the distribution of publications by journal, as shown in Table 4. It

can be observed that 86.90% of the articles were published in PLOS One, whereas only

13.1% articles were from the other seven journals.

Table 4 Distribution of publications across journals

Journal

# (Ratio)

Journal

# (Ratio)

PLOS One

116,324 (86.90%)

PLOS Neglected

Tropical Diseases

3,196 (2.39%)

PLOS Genetics

4,558 (3.41%)

PLOS Biology

1,443 (1.08%)

PLOS Pathogens

3,958 (2.96%)

PLOS Medicine

1095 (0.82%)

8 http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf13327/pdf/tabb1.pdf



3265 (2.44%)

PLOS Clinical Trials

19 (0.01%)

PLOS Computational

Biology

4 Methodology

In this section, we first introduce measures of team impact and team gender

diversity, and then describe the two regression methods employed in the analysis.

4.1 Measuring team impact

Citation counts are widely used as a proxy for research team impact in the science-

of-science studies. Following the recommendation of Wang (2012), and consistent with

common practice in team science studies (Xu et al. 2024), we use a five-year citation

window to measure team impact..

To obtain annual citation counts of the articles, we linked the PLOS dataset with the

PubMed Knowledge Graph, which is an enhanced version of PubMed that integrates

multiple sources of citation data, including PubMed’s own citation data, NIH’s open

citation collection, OpenCitations, and citation data from WoS (Xu et al. 2020). Because

the PLOS dataset identifies publications by DOI, whereas the PubMed Knowledge

Graph primarily uses PMID, we first retrieved the PMID for PLOS articles using the

ID Converter (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/tools/idconv/). Each article was then

matched based on its PMID.

4.2 Measuring team gender diversity

To quantify the degree of gender diversity in different team roles, we adopt two

types of measures: a continuous measure and a binary measure. For the continuous

measure (Yang et al. 2022), the specific formula is given as follows:

𝑇𝐺𝐷𝑖𝑗= −𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑜𝑔2(𝑝𝑖𝑗) −(1 −𝑝𝑖𝑗)𝑙𝑜𝑔2(1 −𝑝𝑖𝑗), 𝑗∈{1,2,3}              (1)

Where 𝑇𝐺𝐷𝑖𝑗 represents team gender diversity of type j in team i, and 𝑝𝑖𝑗 denotes

the proportion of female authors of type j in team i. When 𝑗= 1, it refers to the whole

team; when 𝑗= 2, it refers to the leadership-group gender diversity; and when 𝑗= 3,

it refers to the support-group gender diversity. The range of 𝑇𝐺𝐷 is from 0 to 1. When

𝑇𝐺𝐷= 0, it denotes the team consists of all males or all females. When 𝑇𝐺𝐷= 1, it

means the proportions of males and females in the team are equal. When 0 < 𝑇𝐺𝐷<

1 , it implies that either males or females constitute the majority in the team. For

example, suppose a team consists of two males and one female, and the proportion of

female authors is 0.333. In this case, the 𝑇𝐺𝐷 would be 0.918.

For the binary measure, a team composed of both male and female members is

classified as gender-heterogeneous, whereas a team composed of only one gender is

classified as gender-homogeneous. We further categorized teams by the gender



composition of their leadership and support groups into nine types, as shown in Table


## 5. In the subsequent regression analysis (Table 7, Model 8), team type is represented by


a set of dummy variables, and XLead-XSup serves as the reference category.

Table 5 Team types by gender composition of leadership and support roles

No.

Team types

Abbreviation

1

Mixed-gender leadership group & Mixed-gender support group

XLead-XSup

2

Mixed-gender leadership group & Male-only support group

XLead-MSup

3

Mixed-gender leadership group & Female-only support group

XLead-FSup

4

Male-only leadership group & Mixed-gender support group

MLead-XSup

5

Female-only leadership group & Mixed-gender support group

FLead-XSup

6

Male-only leadership group & Male-only support group

MLead-MSup

7

Male-only leadership group & Female-only support group

MLead-FSup

8

Female-only leadership group & Female-only support group

FLead-FSup

9

Female-only leadership group & Male-only support group

FLead-MSup

4.3 Multivariable and threshold regression

(1) Multivariable regression

Multivariable regression was used to address RQ1. It is well known that citations can

be influenced by various factors. According to previous studies, we included team size

(Yang et al. 2022), international team (Kuan et al. 2024), country diversity (Maddi &

Gingras 2021), institutional diversity, year and disciplines in the regression model to

control for confounding factors (see Table 6).

Table 6 The description of control variables

Variable

Description

Team size

The number of authors in the article teams.

International team

Following Kuan et al. (2024), we defined international team as teams

with authors from two or more distinct countries. This variable is coded

as a binary variable (𝑥= 1  for international teams, and 𝑥= 0  for

domestic teams).

Country diversity

The number of unique countries involved in the teams.

Institutional diversity

The number of unique institutions involved in the teams.

Year

The publication year of the articles.

Discipline

The discipline of the articles.



Since PLOS does not disambiguate authors’ affiliations, we used the DOI of each

PLOS article to match it with the corresponding record in the OpenAlex dataset

9 .

OpenAlex is a widely used bibliometric dataset that links author affiliation to the

Research Organization Registry

10, which provides standardized identifiers and metadata

for research organizations worldwide. This procedure allowed us to gather the

9 https://docs.openalex.org/

10 https://ror.org/



affiliations and country for each author in every article.

The empirical model is defined as follows:

2 +

𝛽5𝑋𝑖+ 𝐷𝑖+ 𝑌𝑖+ 𝜀             (2)

Where 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖 denotes the five-year citation count of article i. Following

the suggestion of Thelwall and Wilson (2014), we transformed citation counts into

logarithmic form prior to regression analysis. To address the issue of zero values

rendering the logarithm undefined, we add one to original citation counts before

applying the transformation. For article i, 𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 represents the gender diversity

within its leadership group, whereas 𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖 denotes that of its support group.

Most prior studies conceptualized and empirically examined the relationship between

gender diversity and team performance as linear(Yang et al. 2022). Such a specification

may overlook the multifaceted effects of gender diversity on team performance, and

several scholars have therefore advocated the use of nonlinear models to more

accurately capture these effects (Xie et al. 2020; Wullum Nielsen & Börjeson 2019).

Accordingly, we include quadratic terms for gender diversity in the leadership group

(i.e., 𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖

2 + 𝛽3𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖+ 𝛽4𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖

𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖+ 𝛽2𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖

2 ). Moreover, 𝑋𝑖

represents control variables for article i. We also included disciplines dummies (𝐷𝑖) and

publication year dummies (𝑌𝑖) to account for disciplinary and temporal effects. Finally,

all regressions were estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS).

2 ) and in the support group (i.e., 𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖

The descriptive statistics of our variables are presented in Tables A1. We also

calculated spearman correlations among the variables, as reported in Table A2.

Although some correlations exceed 0.5, the average variance inflation factor (VIF)

across all variables is 3.19, which is well below the conventional threshold of 10,

indicating that multicollinearity is not a serious concern (Vestal & Danneels 2024).



(2) Threshold regression

To answer RQ2, we adopted threshold regression in our study (Hansen 2000). This


## method is particularly effective for capturing nonlinear relationships between


independent and dependent variables. Many variables in empirical research exhibit

structural breaks, where predictors cross critical thresholds and induce abrupt changes

in their relationship with the dependent variable. In such cases, the threshold effect

identifies the transition point as the threshold value. The number of thresholds and their

corresponding threshold values can be determined automatically by the model using

information criteria such as the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), Akaike

Information Criterion (AIC), or Hannan-Quinn Information Criterion (HQIC), or they

can be specified manually based on domain expertise (Hansen 2000). In this study, both

the number of thresholds and their threshold values were determined automatically by

the threshold regression models.

Unlike conventional approaches that examine moderating effects through

interaction terms in multivariable regression models, threshold regression employs a

segmented estimation strategy. It divides the sample into distinct regimes based on

identified threshold values and estimates separate regression models within each

subsample. This approach offers two key advantages: it provides an intuitive



visualization of how variable relationships evolve across different threshold intervals,

and it improves the interpretability of results. by contrast, although interaction terms

can capture variable interplay, they generally assume that the effects of moderator

variables change monotonically, which may not reflect real situation (Hansen 1999).

The threshold regression used in this study is shown as follows:

𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖= {𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖+ 𝛽2𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖+ 𝛽3𝑋𝑖+ 𝐷𝑖+ 𝑌𝑖+ 𝜀, 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒≤𝛾

𝛽0 + 𝛽4𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖+ 𝛽5𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖+ 𝛽6𝑋𝑖+ 𝐷𝑖+ 𝑌𝑖+ 𝜀, 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒> 𝛾（3）

Where 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒  is the threshold variable, and 𝛾  represents the threshold

parameter. Threshold regression can be expressed as a piecewise function, when

𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒≤𝛾 , the coefficients for 𝐺𝐷𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 and 𝐺𝐷𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖 are 𝛽1 and 𝛽2 ,

respectively; when 𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒> 𝛾, the corresponding coefficients become 𝛽4 and 𝛽5.

The analysis was conducted using the threshold command in STATA (version 17).


## 5. Results


In Section 5.1, we analyzed the relationship between role-specific gender diversity

and team impact from an exploratory perspective (RQ1). In section 5.2, we adopted

regression analysis to further quantify the relationship between role-specific gender

diversity and team impact (RQ1). In Section 5.3, we addressed RQ2 by examining the

moderating effect of team size on this relationship. Finally, in Section 5.4, we conducted

robustness checks to validate our findings.

5.1 The gender diversity of different team roles and team

impact: an exploratory perspective

Figure 3A shows the average team impact across the nine team types, and Figure

3B presents the Welch’s t-tests pairwise differences, where darker blue indicates higher

statistical significance and deeper red indicates lower significance. Teams with male

leadership and mixed-gender support (MLead-XSup) achieve the highest average

citations (avg. five-year citations = 22.29) among all team types, significantly

exceeding other configurations except female-leadership with male support (FLead-

MSup). In contrast, teams with female leadership and female support authors (FLead-

FSup) exhibit the lowest average impact (avg. five-year citations = 15.70), significantly

below all other types (Figure 3B). Male-lead teams with exclusively male support also

perform poorly (MLead-MSup), ranking third from the bottom (avg. five-year citations

= 17.97). By comparison, mixed-gender leadership and support teams (XLead-XSup)

rank second in terms of five-year citations (avg. five-year citations = 21.31). Taken

together, these results suggest that gender-diverse team structures tend to enhance team

impact, although the magnitude of this advantage depends on the distribution of

leadership and support roles.



Figure 3 Team impact on different types of teams (Note: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1)

Disciplinary differences exist in the gender distribution (Huang et al. 2020), team

structure (Xu, Wu, et al. 2022), research paradigms (Jones 2009) and other aspects.

Hence, it is necessary to investigate how these patterns vary across disciplines. To this

end, we conducted three steps. First, we calculated the average five-year citations for

the nine types of teams within each discipline. Second, we ranked the nine types of

teams within each discipline based on their average five-year citations. Third, we

assessed whether the ranking of the nine types of teams was consistent across

disciplines. As shown in Figure 4, the x-axis represents three disciplines with the largest

sample size that are sorted from left to right in terms of the number of publications, and

the y-axis represents the ranking of the nine types of teams11.

Figure 4 shows that teams with male leadership and mixed-gender support (MLead-

XSup) rank first or third across the three disciplines, whereas teams with gender-diverse

leadership and support (XLead-XSup) consistently rank second or third. Teams with

mixed-gender leadership and female support (XLead-FSup) or female leadership and

female support (FLead-FSup) occupy positions between last and third from the bottom,

which is broadly consistent with the results in Figure 3. Interestingly, male-led teams

with male support (MLead-MSup) rank low in Clinical Medicine and Biomedical

Research but relatively high in Biology. Overall, disciplinary differences are evident in

the impact rankings of the nine team types, and the detailed patterns are not entirely

consistent with the aggregate findings in Figure 3. These results further suggest that

disciplinary factors should be taken into account in the subsequent regression analysis.

11 Because articles from Clinical Medicine, Biomedical Research, and Biology constitute approximately 80% of

our dataset, and the other disciplines are insufficiently represented, we limit our comparison to these three fields.



Figure 4 Team impact of nine types of teams by discipline

5.2 The gender diversity of different team roles and team

impact: the perspective of regression analysis

To confirm our earlier observations, we controlled for potential confounding factors

and conducted regression analyses to address RQ1. The regression results are reported

in Table 7. Model (1) includes only the control variables. Models (2)-(6) examine the

effect of gender diversity on team impact for both leadership and support groups. At the

overall team level, without separating leadership and support roles, Model (2) shows a

positive and statistically significant association between overall team gender diversity

and team impact (𝛽= 0.0603, 𝑝< 0.01). To assess the effect of leadership gender

diversity, we introduce both the leadership-group gender diversity (GDleader) and its

squared term (GDleader2) in Models (3)-(4). The results indicate that the coefficient for

leadership-group gender diversity is significantly positive (𝛽= 0.1746 , 𝑝< 0.01 ),

while its squared term is significantly negative (𝛽= −0.1704, 𝑝< 0.01), suggesting

an inverted U-shaped relationship between leadership-group gender diversity and team

impact. The turning point, where citation impact reaches its maximum, occurs at a

gender diversity of approximately 0.5112 in the leadership group. Similarly, Model (6)

includes both the linear and quadratic terms of gender diversity in the support group.

The results show that both coefficients are statically significant, with the quadratic term

being negative (𝛽= −0.1789 , 𝑝< 0.01 ), again indicating an inverted U-shaped

relationship between support-group gender diversity and team impact. The turning

point occurs at a gender diversity of approximately 0.6413. The estimated relationships

for both roles are visualized in Figure 5.

2∗Coefficient of quadratic term for GDleader2 = −

0.1746

2∗(−0.1704) ≈0.51

Coefficient of linear term for GDleader

12 Turning point = −

2∗Coefficient of quadratic term for GDsupport2 = −

0.2287

2∗(−0.1789) ≈0.64

Coefficient of linear term for GDsupport

13 Turning point = −



Next, both leadership-group gender diversity and support-group gender diversity are

included in Model (7). Interestingly, compared with Model (3) and (5), Model (7) shows

that the coefficient for leadership-group gender diversity (GDleader) turns significantly

negative (𝛽= −0.0231, 𝑝< 0.01), whereas the coefficient for support-group gender

diversity (GDsupport) remains significantly positive (𝛽= −0.0709, 𝑝< 0.01). This

pattern suggests that leadership-group gender diversity may exert mixed effects on team

impact. On the one hand, gender-diverse teams can provide a broader range of

perspectives and solutions that accelerate problem-solving (Yang et al. 2022; Maddi &

Gingras 2021). On the other hand, differences in communication styles and experience

may create challenges in coordination, thereby reducing team impact (Nielsen et al.

2018).

We then compared the effects of the nine team types in Model (8). Detailed

classification of the team types is provided in Table 5, and teams composed of mixed-

gender leadership and mixed-gender support groups (XLead-XSup) serve as the


## reference category. The results reveal notable differences across gender configurations


of leadership and support roles. Teams with mixed-gender leadership and male support

groups (XLead-MSup) exhibit significantly lower impact than the reference group (𝛽=

−0.0412, 𝑝< 0.01). Similarly, teams composed of all-male leadership and all-male

support (MLead-MSup) and those with all-female leadership and all-female support

(FLead-FSup) also receive fewer citations (𝛽= −0.0654 , 𝑝< 0.01 ;𝛽= −0.0353 ,

𝑝< 0.01, respectively). These findings suggest that gender-homogeneous structures,

whether male or female, are associated with lower team impact relative to mixed-gender

configurations.

In contrast, several heterogeneous configurations show positive and significant

effects compared to reference groups. Teams with male leadership and mixed-gender

support (MLead-XSup) achieve higher citation counts than the reference group (𝛽=

0.0257, 𝑝< 0.01). Notably, teams with female leadership and male support (FLead-

MSup) exhibit the highest level of impact among these team compositions (𝛽= 0.1800,

𝑝< 0.01).

Figure 5 Estimated relationship between gender diversity and team performance for the leadership

and support groups



Table 7 The estimates for the influence of gender diversity of leadership and support groups on team impact



Variables

（1）

Five-year

citations

（2）

Five-year

citations

（3）

Five-year

citations

（4）

Five-year

citations

（5）

Five-year

citations

（6）

Five-year citations

（7）

Five-year

citations

（8）

Five-year citations

Gender diversity



0.0603∗∗∗

(0.0065)

GDleader



0.0133∗∗∗

(0.0055)

0.1746∗∗∗

(0.0344)

-0.0231∗∗∗

(0.0066)

GDleader2



-0.1704∗∗∗

(0.0359)

GDsupport



0.0558∗∗∗

(0.0061)

0.2287∗∗∗

(0.0314)

0.0709∗∗∗

(0.0075)

GDsupport2



-0.1789∗∗∗

(0.0319)

XLead-MSup



-0.0412∗∗

(0.0167)

XLead-FSup



-0.0298∗

(0.0167)

MLead-XSup



0.0257∗∗∗

(0.0075)

FLead-XSup



0.0273∗∗

(0.0135)

MLead-MSup



-0.0654∗∗∗

(0.0067)

MLead-FSup



0.0970∗∗

(0.0432)

FLead-FSup



-0.0353∗∗

(0.0144)

FLead-MSup



0.1800∗∗∗

(0.0587)

Team size

0.0362∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0342∗∗∗

(0.0007)

International team

0.0372∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0346∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0359∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0354∗∗∗

(0.0008)

0.0345∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0339∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0345∗∗∗

(0.0007)

0.0336∗∗∗

(0.0071)

Country diversity

0.0128∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0344∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0367∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0350∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0343∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0327∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0346∗∗∗

(0.0071)

0.0145∗∗∗

(0.0042)

Institutional diversity

0.0018

(0.0017)

0.0137∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0129∗∗∗

(0.0041)

0.0133∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0136∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0143∗∗∗

(0.0042)

0.0138∗∗∗

(0.0041)

0.0026

(0.0017)

Constant

2.9877∗∗∗

(0.0198)

0.0025

(0.0017)

0.0020

(0.0017)

0.0020

(0.0017)

0.0027

(0.0017)

0.0028

(0.0017)

0.0026

(0.0017)

3.0095∗∗∗

(0.0200)

Discipline fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

Adj R2

0.1285

0.1292

0.1286

0.1287

0.1292

0.1292

0.1291

0.1295

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All 15 disciplinary categories listed in Table 4 are included in the models.

2.9554∗∗∗

(0.0201)

2.9825∗∗∗

(0.0198)

2.9823∗∗∗

(0.0198)

2.9613∗∗∗

(0.0199)

2.9632∗∗∗

(0.0200)

2.9568

(0.0200)



5.3 The moderating role of team size

Table 8 The relationship between gender diversity of different team roles and team impact depends

on team size

(1)

（2）

（3）

Five-year

Five-year

Five-year

Five-year

Variable

citations

citations

citations

citations

(team size<=6)

(team size >6)

(team size <=6)

(team size >6)

Gender diversity



0.0261∗∗∗

0.0361∗∗

(0.0073)

(0.0164)

GDleader

-0.0396∗∗∗

0.0032

(0.0081)

(0.0118)

GDsupport

0.0432∗∗∗

0.0393∗∗

(0.0087)

(0.0176)

Team size

0.0555∗∗∗

0.0219∗∗∗

0.0541∗∗∗

0.0219∗∗∗

(0.0023)

(0.0011)

(0.0023)

(0.0010)

0.0269∗∗

0.0271∗∗∗

International team

0.0111

0.0109

(0.0136)

(0.0106)

(0.0136)

(0.0102)

0.0266∗∗∗

0.0266∗∗∗

Country diversity

-0.0008

-0.0010

(0.0101)

(0.0048)

(0.0101)

(0.0046)

Institutional diversity

0.0116∗∗∗

0.0120∗∗∗

0.0013

0.0012

(0.0029)

(0.0022)

(0.0029)

(0.0020)

Constant

2.8574∗∗∗

3.1987∗∗∗

2.8510∗∗∗

3.2024∗∗∗

(0.0270)

(0.0366)

(0.0270)

(0.0357)

Discipline fixed

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

effect

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

133,858

86,565

47,293

Adj R2



0.1073

0.0981

BIC

0.0004

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All 15 disciplinary

categories listed in Table 4 are included in the models.

We used threshold regression to explore the moderating effect of team size (i.e.,

answering RQ2). Using STATA 17, the model identified a single threshold at a team

size of six (see Table 8, Model (1)). When team size is six or fewer, leadership-group

gender diversity is significantly and negatively associated with team impact (𝛽=

−0.0396 , 𝑝< 0.01 ), whereas support-group gender diversity shows a significant

positive effect (𝛽= 0.0432, 𝑝< 0.01). For team sizes larger than six, the coefficient

for leadership-group gender diversity turns positive but becomes statistically

insignificant ( 𝛽= 0.0032 , 𝑝> 0.1 ), whereas support-group gender remains

significantly and positively associated with team impact (𝛽= 0.0393 , 𝑝< 0.05 ).



These findings suggest that team size moderates the relationship between leadership-

group gender diversity and team impact. In small teams, gender-diverse leadership

diminishes team impact, whereas in larger teams, it begins to exert positive effects,

although the results are not statistically significant.

Moreover, it is important to examine whether team size also moderates the

association between overall team gender diversity and team impact. Based on the

estimated threshold, we categorize teams into two groups: Group 1 includes teams with

six or fewer members, and Group 2 includes teams with more than six members. We

run separate regressions for each group. Models (2) and (3) show that overall team

gender diversity is significantly and positively related to team impact. These results

highlight the imperative need to account for both team roles and team size when

exploring the potential link between team gender diversity and team performance.

5.4 Robustness check

We also conducted robustness tests to ensure the reliability of our conclusions. First,

we re-estimated the model using different citation windows to measure team impact.

Table A3 and Table A4 present the results based on three-year and four-year citations,

respectively. The main findings remain consistent with the results reported in Table 7.

Second, as shown in Table 3, about 10% of the articles were not assigned to any

discipline. These articles were classified into a single category (i.e., other discipline),

and were included in the regression analysis. Moreover, the disciplinary distribution of

our dataset is unbalanced. To test robustness, we restricted the sample to the three

disciplines with the largest representation, including Clinical Medicine, Biomedical

Research, and Biology. Compared with the results from the overall sample, the

coefficients reported in Table A5 show that both leadership-group and support-group

gender diversity have inverted U-shaped relationships with team impact, and that teams

composed of female leadership and male support achieve the highest impact among all

team types, which is consistent with the results reported in Table 7. Third, since the

dependent variable is a count measure and indicates over-dispersion (mean = 20.46,

S.D. = 26.90), we adopted negative binomial regression instead of OLS to estimate the

models. As shown in Table A46, the key findings remain robust, except that the

coefficients for some team types (e.g., XLead-MSup and XLead-FSup) become

insignificant. Nevertheless, the results still demonstrate that gender diversity produces

positive team impacts only when it is reflected across different roles. Taken together,

these analyses indicate that the empirical findings of this study are robust.


## 6. Discussion


Gender as an social identity category that can shape thoughts, perspectives,

experience and perceptions (Lindsey 2015). Gender-diverse teams demonstrate a



greater capacity to integrate varied experiences, beliefs, and resources structured along

gendered lines, thereby exhibiting enhanced potential for generating novel and

impactful outcomes (Wullum Nielsen & Börjeson 2019). Beyond confirming this

insight, our study extends existing knowledge by examining how gender diversity

relates to team performance through inclusion of the perspective of team roles.

Although previous studies often assume gender diversity is universally beneficial, our


## findings reveal a more nuanced effect that depends on team role composition. This


underscores the importance of moving beyond a one-size-fits-all perspective and

considering how gender dynamics and team roles jointly shape collaboration,

communication and performance. These insights can inform the best practices for

optimizing research team construction and management.

Our empirical findings reveal an inverted-U-shaped relationship between gender

diversity and team impact for both leadership and support roles, which is consistent

with the categorization-elaboration model (CEM) (van Knippenberg et al. 2004).

According to this theory, various forms of team diversity (e.g., gender diversity, age

diversity) can simultaneously trigger subgroup categorization processes (Tajfel 1982)

and information-processing mechanisms, leading to mixed effects on team performance.

In our context, at lower level, greater gender diversity for both team roles are associated

with better team impact. A possible explanation is that gender-diverse teams draw on a

broader range of skills and experiences, thereby facilitating discussion and enhancing

performance. However, once gender diversity surpasses the “sweet spot” (0.51 for

support groups and 0.64 for support groups), further increases are linked to lower team

impact. At this stage, intergroup divisions may emerge from a more diverse and

balanced gender composition, impeding communication, interaction, and collaboration

among team members, and ultimately reducing team impact. These empirical findings

provide strong support for the CEM.

In this study, scientific teams are categorized into nine types based on gender

composition across leadership and support roles. Teams with all-female leadership and

all-male support achieve the highest impact, whereas teams with all-male leadership

and all-male support exhibit the lowest impact. These findings highlight that gender

diversity influences team performance in role-specific ways: what matters is not merely

the aggregate proportion of male and female members, but how gender composition

aligns with hierarchical role differentiation. Depending on their configuration,

leadership and support positions may either amplify or mitigate the benefits of gender

diversity.

We also find that leadership-group gender diversity may diminish team impact in

small teams, whereas in large teams it shows a positive, though statistically

nonsignificant. Small teams typically have flatter power structures and simpler

interpersonal dynamics (Xu, Bu, et al. 2022). As a result, negative effects arising from

intergroup bias are more pronounced, leading leadership gender diversity to hinder

team performance. By contrast, in large teams, gender-mixed leadership groups are

better able to manage the challenges of diversity that accompany increased team sizes.

Under such conditions, information elaboration is more likely to occur, thereby

promoting the team’s potential to produce high-impact outcomes (Homan et al. 2020).



6.1 Theoretical and practical implications

This study also has theoretical and practical implications. From a theoretical

perspective, these findings extend research on gender diversity and team performance

by highlighting the importance of role differentiation within teams. Previous studies

generally operationalized diversity in aggregate terms, focusing on overall gender

diversity(Yang et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2025). Our findings suggest that such an

approach may overlook critical role-based mechanisms. Specifically, the gender

composition of leadership and support groups plays a critical role in shaping team

impact. This underscores the need to refine theories of diversity (e.g., CEM) by

incorporating team roles, rather than treating diversity as a uniform construct.

Practically, these insights carry important implications for funding allocation and

team design. Funding agencies aiming to maximize research impact should pay

attention not only to gender balance at the aggregate level of applicant teams but also

to the distribution of gender diversity across leadership and support roles. For scientific

team construction, principal investigators (PIs) of large teams may benefit from

diversifying their leadership groups by gender, whereas PIs of small teams may achieve

greater impact by diversifying their support groups. Deliberately considering gender-

role composition in team design represents a viable strategy for enhancing the academic

influence of scientific teams.

6.2 Limitations

Although this study conducted a large-scale quantitive analysis of the effect of

gender diversity across team roles on team impact, there are still several limitations in

this study.

First, due to the limitations of Genderize.io, most of the Chinese and Korean authors

were excluded from our dataset. Including these authors in future research would yield

a more comprehensive results. Second, Genderize.io is a binary gender inference

system, which prevents accurate identification of individuals with non-binary identities.

Developing new tools that incorporate diverse gender identities would help to address

this shortcoming in future work. Third, although the PLOS dataset is widely used for

conducting science of science research, most of the articles in this dataset come from

biomedical-related disicplines. Therefore, the results should be interpreted with caution

before being generalized to other disciplines. In the future, we plan to expand the


## dataset to include articles from a broader range of disciplines. This will be possible once


author contribution statements become available in other datasets, allowing us to further

validate the generalizability of our findings. Fourth, citation counts were used in our

study to characterize team impact. However, citations represents only one dimension of

impact. Future research could investigate the relationship between role-specific gender

diversity and other indicators of team success, such as productivity, disruptive

innovation (Zhao et al. 2024), technological impact, and combinational novelty (Liu et

al. 2024), which would be of considerable interest to academia. Fifth, although the role



assignment method applied was adapted from a study published in a prestigious journal

(Xu, Wu, et al. 2022), its appropriateness for the new version of the contribution

statement taxonomy remains uncertian. A more generalized method for role assignment

should be developed in future studies. Sixth, in our study, each paper was assigned to a

single discipline, which may not fully capture the interdisciplinary nature of certain

works and could introduce potential bias.


## 7. Conclusion


Grounded in the question of whether team gender heterogeneity is invariably

beneficial for team impact, this study examined the influence of role-specific gender

diversity on scientific impact, and the moderating role of team size. Drawing on

161,193 research articles published in PLOS journals, the results reveal that (1) there

exist an inverted U-shaped relationship between gender diversity and team impact for

both leadership and support roles; (2) female-led teams with male support yield highest

team impact compared among all team types;(3) leadership-group gender diversity is

significantly and negatively associated with team impact when team size is six or fewer,

but the relationship becomes positive once team size exceeds six. These insights

advance the literature on gender diversity and teams by unpacking the complex

interplay between gender diversity, team roles, team size, and performance.

Acknowledgements

Yi Zhao would like to thank Dr. Tongbin Yang from Jiangsu University for his valuable suggestions. This

work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (No. RS-2023-00209775),

ICONS (Institute of Convergence Science), Yonsei University, the National Natural Science Foundation

of China (No. 72074113, No. 72004054), and National Social Science Fund of China (No. 24CTQ027).


## References


Amason, A. C., & Sapienza, H. J. (1997). The Effects of Top Management Team Size and interaction

Norms on Cognitive and Affective Conflict. Journal of Management, 23(4), 495-516.

Andres, P. d., Azofra, V., & Lopez, F. (2005). Corporate Boards in OECD Countries: size, composition,

functioning and effectiveness. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(2), 197-210.

Börner, K., Contractor, N., Falk-Krzesinski, H. J., Fiore, S. M., Hall, K. L., Keyton, J., et al. (2010). A

Multi-Level Systems Perspective for the Science of Team Science. Science Translational

Medicine, 2(49), 49cm24.

Boschini, A., & Sjögren, A. (2007). Is Team Formation Gender Neutral? Evidence from Coauthorship

Patterns. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2), 325-365.

Byrne, D., Clore, G. L., & Smeaton, G. (1986). The attraction hypothesis: Do similar attitudes affect



anything? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), 1167-1170.

Campbell, L. G., Mehtani, S., Dozier, M. E., & Rinehart, J. (2013). Gender-heterogeneous working

groups

produce

higher

quality

science.

PLoS

One,

8(10),

e79147.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0079147

Catalini, C., Fons-Rosen, C., & Gaulé, P. (2020). How Do Travel Costs Shape Collaboration?

Management Science, 66(8), 3340-3360. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3381

Chatman, J. A., Greer, L. L., Sherman, E., & Doerr, B. (2019). Blurred Lines: How the Collectivism

Norm Operates Through Perceived Group Diversity to Boost or Harm Group Performance in

Himalayan

Mountain

Climbing.

Organization

Science,

30(2),

235-259.

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2018.1268

Cummings, J. N., Kiesler, S., Bosagh Zadeh, R., & Balakrishnan, A. D. (2013). Group heterogeneity

increases the risks of large group size: a longitudinal study of productivity in research groups.

Psychol Sci, 24(6), 880-890. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612463082

De Saá-Pérez, P., Díaz-Díaz, N. L., Aguiar-Díaz, I., & Ballesteros-Rodríguez, J. L. (2017). How diversity

contributes to academic research teams performance. R&D Management, 47(2), 165-179.

https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12139

Devine, D. J., Clayton, L. D., Philips, J. L., Dunford, B. B., & Melner, S. B. (1999). Teams in

Organizations: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Effectiveness. Small Group Research, 30(5),

678-711.

Evans, L., Homer, M., & Rayner, S. (2013). Professors as Academic Leaders: The Perspectives of ‘the

Led’. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 41(5), 674-689.

Ghiasi, G., Lariviere, V., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2015). On the Compliance of Women Engineers with a

Gendered

Scientific

System.

PLoS

One,

10(12),

e0145931.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145931

Hambrick, D. C., & Mason, P. A. (1984). Upper Echelons: The Organization as a Reflection of Its Top

Managers. Academy of Management Review, 9(2), 193-206.

Hamilton, B. H., Nickerson, J. A., & Owan, H. (2003). Team Incentives and Worker Heterogeneity: An

Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation. Journal of

Political Economy, 111(3), 465-497.

Hansen, B. E. (1999). Threshold e!ects in non-dynamic panels: Estimation, testing, and inference.

Journal of Econometrics, 93(2), 345-368.

Hansen, B. E. (2000). Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation. Econometrica, 68(3), 575-603.

He, J. (2012). Counteracting Free-Riding with Team Morale—An Experimental Study. Project

Management Journal, 43(3), 62-75. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmj.21272

Homan, A. C., Gundemir, S., Buengeler, C., & van Kleef, G. A. (2020). Leading diversity: Towards a

theory of functional leadership in diverse teams. J Appl Psychol, 105(10), 1101-1128.

https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000482

Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H., & van Praag, M. (2013). The Impact of Gender Diversity on the

Performance of Business Teams: Evidence from a Field Experiment. Management Science,

59(7), 1514-1528. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1674

Huang, J., Gates, A. J., Sinatra, R., & Barabasi, A. L. (2020). Historical comparison of gender inequality

in scientific careers across countries and disciplines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 117(9), 4609-


## 4616. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1914221117


Jones, B. F. (2009). The burden of knowledge and the "death of the Renaissance man": Is innovation



getting harder? The Review of Economic Studies, 76(1), 283–317.

Joshi, A. (2014). By Whom and When Is Women’s Expertise Recognized? The Interactive Effects of

Gender and Education in Science and Engineering Teams. Administrative Science Quarterly,

59(2), 202-239. https://doi.org/10.1177/0001839214528331

Katz, J. S., & Martin, B. R. (1997). What is research collaboration? Research Policy, 26(1), 1-18.

Kim, J., Kim, J., & Owen-Smith, J. (2021). Ethnicity-based name partitioning for author name

disambiguation using supervised machine learning. J Assoc Inf Sci Technol, 72(8), 979-994.

https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24459

Krammer, S. M. S., & Dahlin, P. (2023). An Ivory Tower of Babel? The Impact of Size and Diversity of

Teams on Research Performance in Business Schools. Academy of Management Learning &

Education. https://doi.org/10.5465/amle.2021.0063

Kuan, C.-H., Chen, D.-Z., & Huang, M.-H. (2024). Dubious cross-national affiliations obscure the

assessment of international research collaboration. Journal of Informetrics, 18(2).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2024.101496

Kwiek, M., & Roszka, W. (2021). Gender-based homophily in research: A large-scale study of man-

woman collaboration. Journal of Informetrics, 15(3). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2021.101171

Lafuente, E., & Vaillant, Y. (2019). Gender diversity in the board, women’s leadership and business

performance. International Journal of Manpower, 40(5), 894-916. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijm-

10-2017-0268

Larivière, V., Pontille, D., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2020). Investigating the division of scientific labor using

the Contributor Roles Taxonomy (CRediT). Quantitative Science Studies, 2(1), 111-128.

https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00097

Lee, J., & Chung, J. (2022). Women in top management teams and their impact on innovation.

Technological

Forecasting

and

Social

Change,

183,

121883.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121883

Lee, Y.-N., Walsh, J. P., & Wang, J. (2015). Creativity in scientific teams: Unpacking novelty and impact.

Research Policy, 44(3), 684–697. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.10.007

Liao, J., Zhan, Y., & Yuan, Y. (2023). Top management team stability and corporate default risk: The

moderating effects of industry competition and strategic deviance. Managerial and Decision

Economics, 45(2), 809-827. https://doi.org/10.1002/mde.4038

Lindsey, L. L. (2015). Gender: Sociological Perspectives. United States of America: Pearson.

Liu, L., Yu, J., Huang, J., Xia, F., & Jia, T. (2020). The dominance of big teams in China’s scientific

output. Quantitative Science Studies, 2(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00099

Liu, M., Jaiswal, A., Bu, Y., Min, C., Yang, S., Liu, Z., et al. (2022). Team formation and team impact:

The balance between team freshness and repeat collaboration. Journal of Informetrics, 16(4),


## 101337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2022.101337


Liu, M., Xie, Z., Yang, A. J., Yu, C., Xu, J., Ding, Y., et al. (2024). The prominent and heterogeneous

gender disparities in scientific novelty: Evidence from biomedical doctoral theses. Information

Processing & Management, 61(4). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.103743

Lu, C., Bu, Y., Dong, X., Wang, J., Ding, Y., Larivière, V., et al. (2019). Analyzing linguistic complexity

and

scientific

impact.

Journal

of

Informetrics,

13(3),

817–829.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2019.07.004

Lu, C., Zhang, Y., Ahn, Y. Y., Ding, Y., Zhang, C., & Ma, D. (2020). Co‐contributorship network and

division of labor in individual scientific collaborations. Journal of the Association for



Information Science and Technology, 71, 1162–1178.

Lyngsie, J., & Foss, N. J. (2016). The more, the merrier? Women in top‐management teams and

entrepreneurship in established firms. Strategic Management Journal, 38(3), 487-505.

https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2510

Maddi, A., & Gingras, Y. (2021). Gender Diversity in Research Teams and Citation Impact in Economics

and

Management.

Journal

of

Economic

Surveys,

35(5),

1381-1404.

https://doi.org/10.1111/joes.12420

Madsen, E. B., Nielsen, M. W., Bjornholm, J., Jagsi, R., & Andersen, J. P. (2022). Author-level data

confirm the widening gender gap in publishing rates during COVID-19. elife, 11.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76559

Manners, G. E. (1975). Another Look at Group Size, Group Problem Solving, and Member Consensus.

The Academy of Management Journal, 14(4), 715-724.

McDowell, J. M., & Smith, J. K. (2007). The Effect of Gender‐Sorting on Propensity To Coauthor:

Implications

for

Academic

Promotion.

Economic

Inquiry,

30(1),

68-82.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.1992.tb01536.x

McLeod, J. (2005). Feminists re-reading Bourdieu. Theory and Research in Education, 3(1), 11-30.

https://doi.org/10.1177/1477878505049832

McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social

Networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415-444.

Melero, E., & Palomeras, N. (2015). The Renaissance Man is not dead! The role of generalists in teams

of inventors. Research Policy, 44(1), 154-167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.07.005

Milojevic, S. (2014). Principles of scientific research team formation and evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci

U S A, 111(11), 3984-3989. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1309723111

Mumford, T. V., Campion, M. A., & Morgeson, F. P. (2007). The leadership skills strataplex: Leadership

skill requirements across organizational levels. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(2), 154-166.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2007.01.005

Naik, C., Sugimoto, C. R., Larivière, V., Leng, C., & Guo, W. (2023). Impact of geographic diversity on

citation

of

collaborative

research.

Quantitative

Science

Studies,

1-24.

https://doi.org/10.1162/qss_a_00248

Nielsen, M. W., Bloch, C. W., & Schiebinger, L. (2018). Making gender diversity work for scientific

discovery and innovation. Nat Hum Behav, 2(10), 726-734. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-

0433-1

Nunkoo, R., Thelwall, M., Ladsawut, J., & Goolaup, S. (2020). Three decades of tourism scholarship:

Gender,

collaboration

and

research


## methods.


Tourism

Management,

78.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2019.104056

Pallotti, V., Arzoz Caroselli, V., Esandi, M. E., & Esandi, M. d. C. (2025). Questionable Practices

Concerning Authorship and Their Prevalence: An Umbrella Review of Evidence. Journal of

Academic Ethics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10805-025-09656-6

Phillips, K. W., Duguid, M. M., Thomas-Hunt, M., & Uparna, J. (2013). Diversity as knowledge

exchange: The roles of information processing, expertise, and status. In  The Oxford handbook

of diversity and work. (pp. 157-178, Oxford library of psychology.). New York, NY, US: Oxford

University Press.

Phillips, K. W., & O'Reilly, C. A. (1998). Demography and Diversity in Organizations: A Review of 40

Years of Research. Research in Organizational Behavior, 20, 77-140.



Prakash, A., Varghese, J. J., & Aggarwal, S. (2024). Gender of gender studies: examining regional and

gender-based disparities in scholarly publications. Scientometrics, 129(7), 4471-4493.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-024-05084-2

Robinson-Garcia, N., Costas, R., Sugimoto, C. R., Larivière, V., & Nane, G. F. (2020). Task specialization

across research careers. elife, 9, e60586. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.60586

Saeed, A., Ali, A., & Riaz, H. (2023). Open-up or stay closed: the effect of TMT gender diversity on open

innovation. European Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/ejim-08-

2022-0425

Salton, G., & McGill, M. J. (1983). Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. New York: McGraw

Hill Book Co.

Stahl, G. K., Maznevski, M. L., Voigt, A., & Jonsen, K. (2009). Unraveling the effects of cultural

diversity in teams: A meta-analysis of research on multicultural work groups. Journal of

International Business Studies, 41(4), 690-709. https://doi.org/10.1057/jibs.2009.85

Stewart, G. L. (2016). A Meta-Analytic Review of Relationships Between Team Design Features and

Team

Performance.

Journal

of

Management,

32(1),

29-55.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206305277792

Stvilia, B., Hinnant, C. C., Schindler, K., Worrall, A., Burnett, G., Burnett, K., et al. (2011). Composition

of scientific teams and publication productivity at a national science lab. Journal of the

American

Society

for

Information

Science

and

Technology,

62(2),

270-283.

https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.21464

Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 1-39.

Thelwall, M., Bailey, C., Tobin, C., & Bradshaw, N.-A. (2019). Gender differences in research areas,


## methods and topics: Can people and thing orientations explain the results? Journal of


Informetrics, 13(1), 149-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2018.12.002

Thelwall, M., & Wilson, P. (2014). Regression for citation data: An evaluation of different methods.

Journal of Informetrics, 8(4), 963-971. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2014.09.011

van Knippenberg, D., De Dreu, C. K., & Homan, A. C. (2004). Work group diversity and group

performance: an integrative model and research agenda. J Appl Psychol, 89(6), 1008-1022.

https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.89.6.1008

van Knippenberg, D., & Schippers, M. C. (2007). Work group diversity. Annu Rev Psychol, 58, 515-541.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085546

van Leeuwen, T. N. (2008). Strength and weakness of national science systems: A bibliometric analysis

through cooperation patterns. Scientometrics, 79(2), 389–408. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-

009-0426-y

Vestal, A., & Danneels, E. (2024). Unlocking the Inventive Potential of Knowledge Distance in Teams:

How Intrateam Network Configurations Provide a Key. Organization Science, 35(1), 195-214.

https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2023.1665

Wang, J. (2012). Citation time window choice for research impact evaluation. Scientometrics, 94(3),

851–872. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0775-9

Wang, J., & Hicks, D. (2015). Scientific teams: Self-assembly, fluidness, and interdependence. Journal

of Informetrics, 9(1), 197-207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2014.12.006

Wang, J., Veugelers, R., & Stephan, P. (2017). Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale for users

of

bibliometric

indicators.

Research

Policy,

46(8),

1416-1436.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.06.006



Whitley, R. (2000). The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences. Oxford, UK: Oxford

University Press.

Wu, L., Wang, D., & Evans, J. A. (2019). Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and

technology. Nature, 566(7744), 378–382. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0941-9

Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in production of

knowledge. Science, 316(5827), 1036–1039. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1136099

Wullum Nielsen, M., & Börjeson, L. (2019). Gender diversity in the management field: Does it matter

for

research

outcomes?

Research

Policy,

48(7),

1617-1632.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.03.006

Xie, L., Zhou, J., Zong, Q., & Lu, Q. (2020). Gender diversity in R&D teams and innovation efficiency:

Role

of

the

innovation

context.

Research

Policy,

49(1).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103885

Xu, F., Wu, L., & Evans, J. (2022). Flat teams drive scientific innovation. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 119(23), e2200927119.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200927119

Xu, H., Bu, Y., Liu, M., Zhang, C., Sun, M., Zhang, Y., et al. (2022). Team power dynamics and team

impact: New perspectives on scientific collaboration using career age as a proxy for team power.

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 73(10), 1489–1505.

https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24653

Xu, H., Liu, M., Bu, Y., Sun, S., Zhang, Y., Zhang, C., et al. (2024). The impact of heterogeneous shared

leadership in scientific teams. Information Processing & Management, 61(1), 103542.

Xu, J., Kim, S., Song, M., Jeong, M., Kim, D., Kang, J., et al. (2020). Building a PubMed knowledge

graph. Scientific Data, 7(1), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0543-2

Yang, Y., Tian, T. Y., Woodruff, T. K., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2022). Gender-diverse teams produce

more novel and higher-impact scientific ideas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

of

the

United

States

of

America,

119(36),

e2200841119.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200841119

Zhang, C., Wei, S., Zhao, Y., & Tian, L. (2023). Gender differences in research topic and method selection

in library and information science: Perspectives from three top journals. Library & Information

Science Research, 45(3), 101255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2023.101255

Zhang, C., Zeng, J., & Zhao, Y. (2025). Is higher team gender diversity correlated with better scientific

impact? Journal of Informetrics, 19(2). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2025.101662

Zhao, Y., Liu, L., & Zhang, C. (2022). Is coronavirus-related research becoming more interdisciplinary?

A perspective of co-occurrence analysis and diversity measure of scientific articles.

Technological

Forecasting

and

Social

Change,

175,

121344.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121344

Zhao, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, H., Kim, D., Lu, C., Zhu, Y., et al. (2024). Do more heads imply better

performance? An empirical study of team thought leaders' impact on scientific team

performance.

Information

Processing

&

Management,

61(4),

103757.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2024.103757

Zhu, Y., Kim, D., Jiang, T., Zhao, Y., He, J., Chen, X., et al. (2024). Dependency, reciprocity, and informal

mentorship in predicting long-term research collaboration: A co-authorship matrix-based

multivariate

time

series


## analysis.


Journal

of

Informetrics,

18(1),

101486.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2023.101486




## Appendix


Table A1 Descriptive statistics

Variable

N

Mean

SD

Min

Median

Max

Five-year citations

133858

20.46

26.898

0

14

1538

Gender diversity

133858

0.70

0.376

0

0.890

1

GDleader

133858

0.57

0.439

0

0.811

1

GDsupport

133858

0.66

0.401

0

0.863

1

Team size

133858

6.07

4.191

2

5

346

International team

133858

0.39

0.487

0

0

1

Country diversity

133858

1.59

1.003

1

1

24

Institutional diversity

133858

2.84

2.164

1

2

62

Table A2 Spearman correlation matrix

No.

Variable

VIF

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

Five-year citations



1



2

Gender diversity

5.88

0.044

1



3

GDleader

4.65

0.023

0.710

1



4

GDsupport

3.22

0.050

0.883

0.601

1



5

Team size

1.83

0.171

0.264

0.202

0.292

1



6

International team

2.21

0.054

0.067

0.066

0.071

0.227

1



7

Country diversity

3.22

0.102

0.082

0.081

0.090

0.416

0.734

1



8

Institutional diversity

2.52

0.128

0.125

0.103

0.134

0.636

0.435

0.668

1

Note: all coefficients are significant at the 99% level of significance (P<0.01).



Table A3 Effects of gender diversity in leadership and support groups on team impact (measured

by three-year citations)



Variables

（4）

Three-year

citations

GDleader

0.145***

(0.033)

（1）

Three-year

citations

（2）

Three-year

citations

（3）

Three-year

citations

-0.026***

(0.006)

GDleader2

-0.145***

(0.035)

GDsupport



0.203***

(0.030)

0.066***

(0.007)

GDsupport2



-0.159***

(0.031)

XLead-MSup



-0.026

(0.016)

XLead-FSup



-0.033**

(0.016)

MLead-XSup



0.032***

(0.007)

FLead-XSup



0.024*

(0.013)

MLead-MSup



-0.055***

(0.006)

MLead-FSup



0.098**

(0.042)

FLead-FSup



-0.044***

(0.014)

FLead-MSup



0.179***

(0.057)

Team size

0.035***

(0.001)

0.034***

(0.001)

International team

0.031***

(0.007)

0.034***

(0.001)

0.034***

(0.001)

0.029***

(0.007)

Country diversity

0.014***

(0.004)

0.029***

(0.007)

0.031***

(0.007)

0.015***

(0.004)

Institutional diversity

0.001

(0.002)

0.015***

(0.004)

0.014***

(0.004)

0.002

(0.002)

Constant

2.475***

(0.019)

0.002

(0.002)

0.002

(0.002)

2.495***

(0.019)

Discipline fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

Adj R-squared

0.1315

0.1320

0.1320

0.1323

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.

2.451***

(0.019)

2.457***

(0.019)



Table A4 Effects of gender diversity in leadership and support groups on team impact (measured

by four-year citations)



Variables

（1）

Four-year

（2）

Four-year

（3）

Four-year

（4）

Four-year

citations

GDleader

0.156***

citations

citations

citations

-0.025***

(0.034)

(0.007)

GDleader2

-0.154***

(0.035)

GDsupport



0.212***

0.070***

(0.031)

(0.007)

GDsupport2



-0.164***

(0.031)

XLead-MSup



-0.035**

(0.016)

XLead-FSup



-0.037**

(0.016)

MLead-XSup



0.028***

(0.007)

FLead-XSup



0.027**

(0.013)

MLead-MSup



-0.060***

(0.007)

MLead-FSup



0.096**

(0.042)

FLead-FSup



-0.040***

(0.014)

FLead-MSup



0.157***

(0.058)

Team size

0.035***

0.034***

0.035***

0.034***

(0.001)

International team

0.035***

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.033***

0.034***

0.033***

(0.007)

Country diversity

0.013***

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.014***

0.013***

0.014***

(0.004)

Institutional diversity

0.002

(0.002)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.003

(0.002)

Constant

2.760***

0.003*

(0.002)

0.003

(0.002)

2.735***

2.741***

2.784***

(0.020)

Discipline fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

Adj R-squared

0.1331

0.1336

0.1336

0.1339

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.020)



Table A5 Effects of gender diversity in leadership and support groups on team impact (sample

restricted to Clinical Medicine, Biomedical Research, and Biology)



Variables

（4）

Five-year

citations

GDleader

0.131***

(0.037)

（1）

Five-year

citations

（2）

Five-year

citations

（3）

Five-year

citations

-0.024***

(0.007)

GDleader2

-0.131***

(0.039)

GDsupport



0.176***

(0.034)

0.063***

(0.008)

GDsupport2



-0.132***

(0.034)

XLead-MSup



-0.034*

(0.019)

XLead-FSup



-0.026

(0.019)

MLead-XSup



0.023***

(0.008)

FLead-XSup



0.029**

(0.014)

MLead-MSup



-0.055***

(0.007)

MLead-FSup



0.107**

(0.046)

FLead-FSup



-0.032*

(0.016)

FLead-MSup



0.225***

(0.063)

Team size

0.034***

(0.001)

0.033***

(0.001)

International team

0.031***

(0.008)

0.032***

(0.001)

0.033***

(0.001)

0.030***

(0.008)

Country diversity

0.016***

(0.005)

0.029***

(0.008)

0.031***

(0.008)

0.017***

(0.005)

Institutional diversity

0.003

(0.002)

0.016***

(0.005)

0.016***

(0.005)

0.003*

(0.002)

Constant

5.244***

(0.843)

0.004**

(0.002)

0.003*

(0.002)

5.290***

(0.842)

Discipline fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

108,531

108,531

108,531

108,531

Adj R-squared

0.0975

0.0979

0.0978

0.0982

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.

5.248***

(0.843)

5.236***

(0.843)



Table A6 Effects of gender diversity in leadership and support groups on team impact (Negative

Binomial regression estimates)



Variables

（4）

Five-year

citations

GDleader

0.165***

(0.035)

（1）

Five-year

citations

（2）

Five-year

citations

（3）

Five-year

citations

-0.017**

(0.007)

GDleader2

-0.179***

(0.036)

GDsupport



0.148***

(0.032)

0.023***

(0.008)

GDsupport2



-0.140***

(0.033)

XLead-MSup



0.001

(0.017)

XLead-FSup



-0.019

(0.017)

MLead-XSup



0.020***

(0.008)

FLead-XSup



-0.008

(0.014)

MLead-MSup



-0.015**

(0.007)

MLead-FSup



0.071

(0.044)

FLead-FSup



-0.052***

(0.015)

FLead-MSup



0.201***

(0.060)

Team size

0.038***

(0.001)

0.038***

(0.001)

International team

-0.012*

(0.007)

0.037***

(0.001)

0.038***

(0.001)

-0.013*

(0.007)

Country diversity

0.028***

(0.004)

-0.013*

(0.007)

-0.011

(0.007)

0.029***

(0.004)

Institutional diversity

0.007***

(0.002)

0.029***

(0.004)

0.028***

(0.004)

0.007***

(0.002)

Constant

3.320***

(0.020)

0.007***

(0.002)

0.007***

(0.002)

3.323***

(0.020)

lnalpha

-0.347***

(0.004)

3.309***

(0.020)

3.314***

(0.020)

-0.347***

(0.004)

Discipline fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effect

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

133,858

133,858

133,858

133,858

Log likelihood

-530364.75

-530366.23

-530372.45

-530355.93

Prob > chi2

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

Pseudo R2

0.0170

0.0170

0.0170

0.0170

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.

-0.347***

(0.004)

-0.347***

(0.004)