Comparing scientiﬁc and technological impact of biomedical research

Qing Ke∗

Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research, School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering,

Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47408, USA


## Abstract


Traditionally, the number of citations that a scholarly paper receives from other papers is used as the

proxy of its scientiﬁc impact. Yet citations can come from domains outside the scientiﬁc community, and

one such example is through patented technologies—paper can be cited by patents, achieving technological

impact. While the scientiﬁc impact of papers has been extensively studied, the technological aspect remains

less known in the literature. Here we aim to ﬁll this gap by presenting a comparative study on how 919

thousand biomedical papers are cited by U.S. patents and by other papers over time. We observe a positive

correlation between citations from patents and from papers, but there is little overlap between the two

domains in either the most cited papers, or papers with the most delayed recognition. We also ﬁnd that

the two types of citations exhibit distinct temporal variations, with patent citations lagging behind paper

citations for a median of 6 years for the majority of papers. Our work contributes to the understanding of

the technological impact of papers.

arXiv:1804.04105v2  [cs.DL]  3 Jul 2018

Keywords:

patent-to-paper citation, non-patent reference, technological impact


## 1. Introduction


Scientiﬁc research builds upon existing knowledge, and such reliance is often manifested by citing previous

scientiﬁc papers. Citation ﬂows among papers therefore have long been used to study the scientiﬁc enterprise,

such as mapping knowledge domains (Rosvall & Bergstrom, 2008), tracking the evolution of science and the

emergence of new ﬁelds (Rosvall & Bergstrom, 2010; Sinatra et al., 2015), understanding the formation of

scientiﬁc consensus (Shwed & Bearman, 2010), allocating credit in science (Shen & Barab´asi, 2014), among

many others. Citation-based metrics have been increasingly adopted to assess the scientiﬁc impact of various

entities in the scientiﬁc community, from papers (Wang et al., 2013) and authors (Hirsch, 2005; Sinatra et al.,


## 2016) to journals (Stigler, 1994; Varin et al., 2016), institutions (Davis & Papanek, 1984), and nations (King,


2004). Yet scholarly papers can have their impact that reaches domains beyond the scientiﬁc community.

Here, we focus on one such domain—patented technologies—to study the technological impact of papers, as

patents are the most widely used ones to represent technological advance (Fleming & Sorenson, 2004; Meyer,

2002). Although such representation is limited by the possibility that not all patentable inventions have

been patented, scholars have long used patent data to understand innovative activities and the development

of technologies.

Papers that are cited by a patent are listed in the non-patent references (NPRs) section of a patent

application and considered relevant to the application by either the applicant or the patent examiner. Apart

from papers, many other types of documents may also be listed as NPRs, such as books, Web pages, etc.

Patent law imposes an obligation on patent applicants to submit relevant “prior art” of which they are

aware, including both patents and non-patent materials, and failure to do so may result in the application

∗Corresponding author

Email address: qke@indiana.edu (Qing Ke)

Preprint submitted to Journal of Informetrics

July 5, 2018



unpatentable.

Patent examiner who reviews the application may ﬁnd prior art themselves, generating

additional citations, and then determines the patentability of the invention.

Studies about the analysis of patent-to-paper citation linkages started already in the 1980s. Narin &

Olivastro (1992) reported a statistical analysis on the types of NPRs and the time and nation dimension of

scientiﬁc NPRs. Scholars have proposed several interpretations about the patent-to-paper citation linkages.

One of the most adopted ones is that the linkage signals direct knowledge ﬂows (Jaﬀe et al., 1993; Azoulay

et al., 2011), that is, the occurrence of citations to a patent or a paper is argued to indicate that the inventors

have beneﬁted from the patent or the paper. This interpretation, although subject to debate (Meyer, 2000)

and limited by the fact that patent examiners can also add citations (Alc´acer & Gittelman, 2006; Alc´acer

et al., 2009; Lemley & Sampat, 2012), has been the basis of many studies that attempt to demonstrate how

publicly-ﬁnanced research contributes to technological advances and private-sector innovations (Narin et al.,

1997; McMillan et al., 2000; Ahmadpoor & Jones, 2017; Azoulay et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017), motivating

further public support for scientiﬁc research. Fleming & Sorenson (2004) argued that the mechanism through

which science increases the rate of invention is that science leads inventors’ search process more directly to

useful combinations. Other scholars have argued that patent-to-paper citations signal relatedness between

science and technology (Callaert et al., 2014).

Our work shifts the attention from interpreting the linkage to assessing the technological impact of

papers. In this regard, a related line of literature is the examination of the broader impact of research

beyond the traditional scientiﬁc community. Existing work has examined how papers are covered by news

media (Phillips et al., 1991), used in the development of drug products (Williams et al., 2015), referenced in

clinical guidelines (Grant et al., 2000), and mentioned on the social Web (e.g., Twitter and Wikipedia) (Thel-

wall et al., 2013), among many other outlets. Our work extends this line of literature by focusing on the

technological community, which hitherto has been less explored, and investigates how papers are cited by

patents. Moreover, we emphasize citation growth over time rather than simple citation counts at a partic-

ular time point, allowing us to explore the dynamics of the utilization of scientiﬁc research for technology

development. The only study that is similar to our work is the one by Ding et al. (2017). However, we not

only look at the entire citation history of papers as opposed to two ﬁve-year time windows considered by

them, but also make a comparison of citations received from patents and from papers.

Based on the cohort of biomedical papers that have received citations from U.S. patents, we perform

a comparative study on how they are cited by patents and by other papers over time. We report a set of

stylized facts about the two types of citations. First, similar to paper citations, patent citations are also

heterogeneously distributed. Yet, highly-cited papers in the two domains have small overlap. Second, there

are delayed-recognition papers that achieve high popularity among patents after years of dormant. Third,

patent citations generally lag behind paper citations for the majority of papers.


## 2. Data and methods


For each paper, we assembled two types of citations, namely those from other papers and from patents.

We ﬁrst describe the patent citation case. We focused only on U.S. patents, due to the public availability

of patent bibliographic data over a long period of time. To get citation information from patents, we down-

loaded the front page bibliographic data of all utility patents granted by the United States Patent and Trade-

mark Oﬃce (USPTO) between 1976 and 2013 from https://bulkdata.uspto.gov, and excluded withdrawn

patents (https://www.uspto.gov/patents-application-process/patent-search/withdrawn-patent-numbers).

Each patent included a list of references containing previously issued patents and optional NPRs that can

refer to essentially anything, including books, papers, patent applications, online resources, etc. As we are

interested in papers, we further excluded patents without any NPR, ending up with 1, 637, 072 patents.

We then matched their NPRs with papers indexed in MEDLINE, a large-scale bibliographic database

for biomedical research literature maintained by the National Library of Medicine (NLM). The matching

steps are as follows:


## 1. We submitted a search query to PubMed where the search term is the entire NPR text, with the URL


following: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=[NPR]&report=uilist&format=text, which

returned the matched PMID.

2



Table 1: Confusion matrix for results of matching non-patent references to MEDLINE papers.

True positive = 117

False positive = 0

False negative = 6

True negative = 85


## 2. If the ﬁrst step failed, we then extracted relevant bibliographic information, such as author, title,


journal, volume, number, pages, and year, available in the NPR text, using the AnyStyle parser

(https://anystyle.io/). It employs a machine learning technique called Conditional Random Fields

to parse citation text with any style, which is achieved by pre-training the model with diﬀerent styles

of labeled citation text.


## 3. After the extraction, we searched PubMed using the ECitMatch E-utility (https://dataguide.nlm.


nih.gov/eutilities/utilities.html#ecitmatch), which accepts 5 types of information as input,

namely journal, year, volume, ﬁrst page, and author name, and returns the matched PMID. When

searching, we ﬁrst used all the 5 ﬁelds and, if failed, all the 5 possible combinations of 4 ﬁelds.

To validate our matching results, we manually matched 208 randomly selected NPRs, and Table 1 reports

the confusion matrix. For 117 cases, hand labeling and the matching method found the same paper (true

positives); for 85 cases, both agreed that there was no paper matched (true negatives); and for 6 cases, our

matching method deemed that there was no paper matched but manual labeling found one (false negatives).

A total of 919, 222 unique papers were matched.

After this integration step, we counted, for a paper published in calendar year tp, the number of patent

citations it received in the t-th (t ∈[0, L]; L = T −tp; T = 2013) year after its publication, denoted as

cP

t . Note that the citing patents in each year t (calender year tp + t) are those issued at time t rather than

those whose applications were submitted at t. The total number of patent citations it received until the end

of the observation period is CP = PT −tp

t=0

cP

t . Here we do not distinguish between citations generated by

applicants or examiners, as we do not concern about knowledge spillover and examiner-added citations may

also indicate the impact of papers.

To get the number of citations from papers, we turn to the Web of Science (WoS) database, as citation


## data is available only for PubMed Central papers. We used a version of WoS currently housed at the Indiana


University Network Science Institute to retrieve the paper citation data. To locate MEDLINE papers in

WoS, we used the mapping data between PMID (PubMed ID) and UT (Accession Number), which are the

two identiﬁers used in their respective database, and successfully found 859, 085 (93.46%) MEDLINE papers

in WoS. When counting citations, we only considered the following types of documents: article, review,

editorial, note, and letter. For each of the papers under consideration, we denote its yearly number of

citations from other papers as cA

t , and CA is the total number of paper citations it received by 2013.

For analysis that involved the entire MEDLINE database, we used a snapshot in 2015 that contained

23, 343, 329 papers. To get the ﬁelds of papers, we chose to use the NLM Catalog data (https://www.ncbi.

nlm.nih.gov/nlmcatalog), as it is speciﬁcally created to be used in conjunction with other databases such

as MEDLINE maintained by NLM. It assigns each indexed journal to one or more categories called Broad

Subject Terms (e.g., Biochemistry, Cell Biology, Nursing, Health Services Research).


## 3. Results


The overarching goal of the present study is to examine how patent citations of papers are diﬀerent from

paper citations. To this end, we present four sets of results. First, we report in Section 3.1 descriptive

statistics on the types of papers that get cited by patents, journals where these papers were published, and

ﬁelds to which they belong, given that these statistics are not well-known in the existing literature. Second,

in Section 3.2, we examine how total patent and paper citations diﬀer. Next, Section 3.3 examines how

patent and paper citations change over time by focusing on the delayed recognition phenomenon. Finally,

Section 3.4 performs a lead-lag analysis of citation dynamics.

3



Table 2: Document type distribution for 859, 085 papers cited by USPTO-issued patents.

Type

Count

%

Article

744, 309

86.64

Review

63, 709

7.42

Note

29, 344

3.42

Editorial

10, 520

1.22

Letter

8, 544

0.99

Others

2, 659

0.31

3.1. Fields and journals

The 919, 222 papers that get patent citations only account for a very small portion (4%) of all 22, 975, 980

MEDLINE papers published until 2013. Our estimation is similar to the one obtained from a recent study

where papers in WoS rather than MEDLINE were considered: 1.41 out of 32 million, or 4.4% of, WoS papers

were cited by USPTO-issued patents (Ahmadpoor & Jones, 2017).

Table 2 shows the distribution of document types assigned by WoS for the 859, 085 MEDLINE papers

indexed there. Articles contribute to the largest portion (86.6%), followed by review, note, editorial, and

letter.

Table 3 displays the top 20 most cited biomedical research ﬁelds, as deﬁned by NLM as Broad Subject

Terms, which in total account for 73.1% of patent citations. For each ﬁeld, we derived three statistics: (1)

the total number of patent citations of all papers published in journals that belong to the ﬁeld, (2) the unique

number of papers that are cited by patents, and (3) the fraction of papers that are cited by patents among

all papers published there. While the ﬁrst two are of retrospective, the third one is of prospective, since

each journal publishes diﬀerent amounts of papers. Biochemistry is the most cited ﬁeld, attracting 12.9%

of citations from patents, followed by Science (10.6%), Molecular Biology (6.0%), Allergy and Immunology

(5.2%), Cell Biology (4.2%), and Chemistry (3.7%). Here “Science” covers multi-disciplinary journals like

Nature and Science, similar to the Multidisciplinary Science designated in Journal Citation Reports (JCR).

The second observation from Table 3 is that the share of citations for each ﬁeld is roughly proportional

to the share of the number of unique papers cited, except for the Science category. This means that multi-

disciplinary journals accrue patent citations disproportionately, suggesting a larger-than-average number of

patent citations for papers published there.

When looking at the fraction of cited papers among all papers published (“% Published” column), we

observe that the overall tendency to be cited by patents varies across ﬁelds. Among these most cited ﬁelds,

Biotechnology has the largest portion (14%) of papers cited by patents. Virology, Biochemistry, Molecular

Biology, Allergy and Immunology, and Cell Biology all have more than 10% of such papers. On the other

hand, only 1.7% of papers belonging to Medicine get patent citations, which is similar for General Surgery.

Cardiology, Neurology, Biology, and Physiology also generate a small fraction of patent-cited papers.

The last column in Table 3 indicates whether these ﬁelds belong to basic research or clinical medicine, as

categorized by Narin et al. in the 1976 pioneering work on the structure of biomedical literature (Narin et al.,

1976). Although the number of basic research ﬁelds is similar to the ones belonging to clinical medicine,

basic research surpass clinical medicine once we weight by total citations or unique papers. This resonates

with previous results (Narin et al., 1997; McMillan et al., 2000).

Next, we delve into journals. Table A.1 reports the top 10 ﬁeld-speciﬁc journals that received the most

patent citations. For each journal, we present the same set of statistics as in Table 3. We see from Table A.1

that papers that obtained patent citations were published in leading journals. Across ﬁelds, PNAS, Journal

of Biological Chemistry (JBC), a journal with a long publishing history, and Science are the top three

most cited journals. They are also the three journals that published the largest number of papers that are

cited by patents. Other highly-cited journals include Nature, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, Nucleic Acids

Research, and Cell.

Similar to what has been observed in Table 3, most journals attract patent citations proportionate to

their share of cited papers. But this is not the case for Cell: only 15% of Cell Biology papers were published

4



Table 3: List of top 20 most cited ﬁelds. For each ﬁeld, as deﬁned by NLM as Broad Subject Term, we counted the total

number of patent citations of papers published in journals that belong to the ﬁeld, as well as the unique number of papers

cited by patents and the fraction of these papers among all papers in this ﬁeld. Journals that are designated to multiple ﬁelds

are counted multiple times. “Science” covers multi-disciplinary journals.

Field

# Cites

% Cites

# Papers

% Papers

% Published

Category

Biochemistry

603, 322

12.86

143, 381

12.26

11.58

Basic

Science

495, 804

10.57

57, 054

4.88

9.64

–

Molecular Biology

282, 126

6.02

62, 826

5.37

11.19

Basic

Allergy and Immunology

243, 044

5.18

58, 866

5.03

11.09

Clinical

Cell Biology

198, 189

4.23

41, 998

3.59

10.30

Basic

Chemistry

175, 537

3.74

44, 047

3.77

7.96

–

Pharmacology

167, 290

3.57

46, 249

3.96

7.11

Clinical

Neoplasms

162, 979

3.48

45, 752

3.91

6.64

–

Medicine

158, 470

3.38

38, 109

3.26

1.69

Clinical

Biotechnology

127, 242

2.71

22, 701

1.94

14.04

–

Neurology

101, 226

2.16

32, 322

2.76

3.62

Clinical

Biophysics

97, 713

2.08

27, 627

2.36

6.62

Basic

Virology

83, 114

1.77

20, 188

1.73

13.83

Basic

Physiology

82, 901

1.77

25, 268

2.16

4.25

Basic

Cardiology

82, 898

1.77

19, 875

1.70

3.61

–

Microbiology

78, 376

1.67

25, 299

2.16

6.78

Basic

Ophthalmology

75, 156

1.60

22, 185

1.90

5.74

Clinical

Vascular Diseases

71, 664

1.53

19, 435

1.66

5.14

–

Biology

70, 833

1.51

19, 696

1.68

4.19

–

General Surgery

68, 991

1.47

15, 409

1.32

1.80

Clinical

in Cell, yet they account for 31% of citations to the ﬁeld. Other prominent examples, although to a lesser

extent, include Nucleic Acids Research, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, Nature, and Science.

Table A.1 also provides results from a prospective analysis.

Across these ﬁelds, Annual Review of

Immunology has the highest fraction (54%) of papers that are cited by patents, followed by Journal of

Medicinal Chemistry (43%), Cell (38%), and EMBO Journal (30%).

On the other hand, Nature and

Science have a relatively low fraction, which could simply due to the fact that they are multidisciplinary

journals that publish non-biomedical papers.

A ﬁnal point regarding both Tables 3 and A.1 is that these results are limited by the fact that MEDLINE

is a database for the biomedical research literature. As such, it may have low coverage of papers in other

disciplines such as physics and engineering, especially if papers in these disciplines are not directly related

to biomedicine. This may to some extent dictate our results. For example, in a seminal work by Narin et al.

(1997) that studied citations from U.S. patents to papers, they found that Tetrahedron is among the top

most cited Chemistry journals. However, it fails to make it top in Table A.1, because MEDLINE only has a

limited coverage of papers in Tetrahedron. Future work therefore is needed to compare how our results are

diﬀerent from the ones based on other databases like WoS.

3.2. Total citations

How many citations does a paper receive from patents? How does it compare to citations from other

papers? In this section, we investigate total citations. Tables A.2 and A.3 list the top 10 papers by total

patent citations CP and paper citations CA, respectively. The paper with the highest number of paper

citations in our sample happens to be the most cited one of all time (Noorden et al., 2014).

Heterogeneity in the number of patent citations CP is present for the cohort of 919, 222 papers that got

cited by patents, as evidenced from Fig. 1A where we plot the survival distribution of CP . Although 414, 981

(45.1%) papers have only one patent citation, there exists papers that are cited by thousands of patents.

We ﬁtted the distribution with the power-law function, giving us exponent αP = 2.93. For comparison, we

5



0.40

10

0

A

B

C

0.35

3

10

1

104

0.30

Number of papers

10

2

0.25

103

Similarity

P(c

C)

log10 CP

2

10

3

0.20

102

0.15

10

4

CP

1

P = 2.93

CA

0.10

101

10

5

All papers

Only articles

0.05

A = 3.01

10

6

100

0

0.00

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

log10(CA + 1)

80

85

90

95

100

Percentile

CP, CA + 1

Figure 1: Patent and paper citation statistics. (A) Survival distribution functions of total number of patent citations CP and

paper citations CA across all papers that are cited by at least one U.S. patent (CP ≥1). Both CP and CA are measured until

−αP

, where



CP


## 2013. The red dashed line corresponds to the estimation of the power-law distribution p(CP ) = αP −1


CP

min

CP

min

CP

min = 45 and αP = 2.93. The blue dashed line is the power-law ﬁt of CA, where CA

min = 1344 and αA = 3.01. Both are

estimated using the method developed in Alstott et al. (2014) and Clauset et al. (2009). (B) Heat map between log10(CA + 1)

and log10 CP . The color encodes the number of papers. The white dashed line corresponds to CP = CA. The white crosses

highlight the top 10 most cited papers by patents (Table A.2). (C) Overlap between the two lists of top cited papers by CP

and CA.

also show in Fig. 1A the distribution of CA, the total number of paper citations, and the power-law ﬁt yields

exponent αA = 3.01. This suggests that despite paper citations are larger than patent citations—which

could simply due to the fact that there is a larger pool of papers than that of patents—they exhibit similar

speed of decay.

We further compare total patent and paper citations. Fig. 1B plots CP against CA in the form of heat

map, where the color encodes the frequency of papers. The map features a broad band with an upward

slope, indicating that papers under our consideration that have more paper citations in general tend to

attract more patent citations as well. The Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcient between CP and CA is

0.228. Such a positive correlation persists (coeﬃcient 0.251) if we consider all the 15, 678, 754 MEDLINE

papers that can be found in WoS. We also observe that the region of the highest density is located in the

lower left of the heat map, corresponding to the case where most papers have paper citations less than 100

and patent citations less than 10. The map indicates that the vast majority of papers have less patent

citations than paper citations, but 22, 736 (2.65%) papers exhibit the opposite, among which 8 of the top

10 papers with most patent citations are in this case. A total of 6, 166 (0.7%) papers are cited by patents

but got zero paper citation.

Are papers that are highly cited in the scientiﬁc community also highly cited in the patent sphere?

We quantiﬁed the extent of overlap between the two sets of top cited papers using a similarity measure.

Formally, let M P (M A) be the set of papers with the number of patent (paper) citations no less than

the threshold corresponding to a given percentile, and the similarity between M P and M A is deﬁned as

s =

M P ∩M A /

M P , which measures the fraction of top cited papers by patents that are also top cited

by papers. Fig. 1C shows that similarity s steadily decreases as we increase the percentile. Only 18% of the

top 1% most cited papers by patents are also in the top 1% by the number of paper citations, indicating

a small overlap of papers that are highly cited in both the scientiﬁc and the technology community. This

200

pattern is consistent if we consider only research articles (Fig. 1C) or papers in one ﬁled (Fig. A.1A).

3.3. Delayed recognition papers

The previous section has examined the total number of citations measured at the end of our observation

period T = 2013, but how it reached to that number can be diverse. We now look at time-dependent citation

growth. From now on, we only restrict our analysis to the cohort of 852, 919 papers that (1) were published

6



10

0

0.30

A

B

10

1

0.25

10

2

0.20

Similarity

CCDF

10

3

0.15

10

4

0.10

BP

All papers

Only articles

10

5

0.05

BA

10

6

0.00

80

85

90

95

100

Percentile

10

1

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

B + 10

Figure 2: Beauty Coeﬃcient BP and BA calculated based on patent and paper citation dynamics. (A) Distributions of BP

and BA. (B) Similarity of the sets of top SBs based on diﬀerent percentiles.

from 1976 and onward, since patent citation data is available only starting from 1976, and (2) had at least

one paper citation (CA > 0), since we are interested in the comparison between cP

t and cA

t .

We ﬁrst focus on a class of papers—the so-called “Sleeping Beauty” papers that lie dormant in a long

period of time after their publication and then suddenly become highly cited. This notion has been mostly

constrained within the scientiﬁc community, that is, citation curves based on which SBs are discovered are

derived from how many other scientiﬁc papers have cited the focal one. Recent work has started to extend

this notion to the technology domain (van Raan, 2017), and here we investigate whether there are also SBs

that are perceived as late boomer by the technology community.

To do so, we calculated the Beauty Coeﬃcient based on the cP

t and cA

t curve of each paper (Ke et al.,

2015), denoted as BP and BA, respectively. Tables A.4 and A.5 report the top 10 SBs by BP and BA,

respectively. Fig. 2A, which plots the distributions of BP and BA, indicates that the extent of delayed

recognition of papers perceived by both the scientiﬁc and technology community spans three orders of

magnitude, similar to what has been observed before (Ke et al., 2015). Regarding individual papers, there

is a negligible correlation between their BP and BA values (Spearman correlation coeﬃcient 0.09). There

is a low overlap of top SBs recognized by the two communities, as shown in Fig. 2B: only 5% of the top

1% SBs measured from patent citations also rank in the top 1% SBs measured from paper citations. This

observation still holds even if we consider only articles (Fig. 2B) or papers in one ﬁeld (Fig. A.1B). These


## results suggest diﬀerent life-cycles of patent and paper citations.


3.4. Time-dependent citation accumulation

Having looked at a particular type of papers, we now characterize the temporal variation of citations.

To do so, we introduce the following parameters to describe a given citation dynamics curve ct:


## 1. tf = arg


n

mint

Pt

t′=0 ct > 0

o

. It measures the number of years taken to obtain the ﬁrst citation;


## 2. tm = arg {maxt ct}. It is the number of years taken to obtain the maximum yearly citations;



## 3. I = 1 (∃t s.t. ct < ctm/2, t ∈[tm + 1, L]). It indicates whether the yearly citations have decreased to


half of the maximum;

(

L −tm,

I = 0

th −tm,

I = 1. The ﬁrst case captures the number of years that the curve has stayed above


## 4. τ =


ctm/2 after reaching its maximum, given that the curve has not fallen below half of the maximum.

7



50

400

2000

40

A

B

tm = tP

m

tA

m

350

1750

35

40

300

1500

30

250

1250

25

30

cA

t

cA

t

200

1000

20

cP

t

cP

t

20

150

750

15

100

500

10

10

50

250

5

0

0

0

0

0

5

10

15

20

t

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

t

Figure 3: Yearly number of paper citations cA

t (left axis) and patent citations cP

t

(right axis) of (A) Bowie et al. (1990) and

(B) Mosmann (1983).

The second case measures the number of years taken to fall below the half of the maximum, where th

is the time when ct drops below ctm/2 for the ﬁrst time.

While the ﬁrst two summarize how ct reaches the maximum, the latter two characterize how ct decrease

after that. As each paper is associated with two time-series, namely cP

t and cA

t , we further compute two

additional parameters: ∆tf = tP

f −tA

f and ∆tm = tP

m −tA

m, capturing how many years the ﬁrst and the

maximum patent citation lag behind the paper citation case.

As illustration, Fig. 3 shows cP

t and cA

t for two papers. For the ﬁrst paper (Bowie et al., 1990), which

was published in 1990, its yearly paper citations cA

t reached its maximum quickly (tA

f = 0, tA

m = 1) and then

faded away steadily (IA = 1, τA = 3), whereas the patent citations cP

t kept increasing for 20 years (tP

f = 1,

tP

m = 20) and then quickly died out (IP = 1, τP = 3), therefore ∆tf = 1 and ∆tm = 19. For the second

paper (Mosmann, 1983), published in 1983, its yearly paper citations reached the peak at the end of the

observation period (tA

f = 1, tA

m = 30, IA = 0, τ A = 0), whereas the patent citations climbed to the peak 16

years after publication, yielding ∆tm = −14.

We calculated the introduced parameters for each paper in our cohort. Fig. 4 presents the distributions

of these parameters across all papers, allowing us to probe overall patterns of their citation dynamics. First,

Fig. 4A, which shows the cumulative distribution of tP

f and tA

f , indicates that almost all papers obtained

their ﬁrst paper citation during 5 years after publication, while only 30% of papers got cited by patents in 5

years. In general, we observe from Fig. 4B that ﬁrst patent citation occurred after ﬁrst paper citation was

obtained (∆tf > 0) for almost all papers, and the median lag is 7 years.

Focusing on tm, Fig. 4C indicates that the median number of years taken to reach maximum yearly

citations is 4 and 8 years for paper and patent citations, respectively. Fig. 4D shows that the majority

(78.9%) of papers obtained maximum yearly patent citations after the same event happened to paper

citations (∆tm < 0), and median lag is 6 years for those papers.

Focusing on how citations decrease after the peak, for only 0.6% papers, their patent citations have

not dropped below half of the maximum (IP = 0; Fig. 4E); and 9% for the paper citation case (IA = 0;

Fig. 4F). Fig. 4H indicates that most papers belonging to this category obtain maximum citations very

recently—within 3 and 7 years close to the end of the observation period for the patent and paper citation

case, respectively.

For the remaining 99.4% and 91% papers whose yearly patent and paper citations have decreased below

ctm/2, Fig. 4G shows that such decay is very rapid for both cP

t and cA

t , taking less than 3 and 8 years for

patent and paper citations, respectively.

8



1.0

1.0

tP

f

tA

f

CDF

0.5

0.5

A

B

0.0

0.0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

tf

20

10

0

10

20

30

tf = tP

f

tA

f

1.0

1.0

tP

m

tA

m

CDF

0.5

0.5

C

D

0.0

0.0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

tm

30

20

10

0

10

20

30

tm = tP

m

tA

m

1.0

0.75

Portion

0.50

0.5

0.25

E

F

IP = 0

IP = 1

0.0

IA = 0

IA = 1

0.00

1.0

1.0

P

P

CDF

0.5

0.5

A

A

G

H

0.0

0.0

5

10

15

20

25

I = 1

0

5

10

15

20

25

I = 0

Figure 4: Distribution of parameters characterizing the temporal variation of patent and paper citations. (A) Cumulative

distribution function of the number of years taken to get the ﬁrst patent (tP

f ) and paper (tA

f ) citation. (B) CDF of ∆tf = tP

f −tA

f .

(C) CDF of the number of years taken to reach to the maximum yearly patent (tP

m) and paper (tP

m) citations. (D) CDF of

∆tm = tP

m −tA

m. (E–F) The distribution of whether yearly citations have fallen to half of maximum. (G–H) CDF of τ given

I = 1 and I = 0.


## 4. Discussion


The increasing availability of large-scale datasets that systematically record how scholarly papers are


## referenced and mentioned in diﬀerent channels has opened new possibilities for searching for the broader


impact of research beyond the traditional scientiﬁc community.

Previous studies have focused on news

media, clinical guidelines, policy documents, and the social Web.

In this work, we looked at another

domain—patented technologies—that has received little attention so far in the literature, and studied the

technological impact of papers.

Based on a newly-created dataset that links millions of non-patent references made by U.S. patents to

MEDLINE papers, we compared citation statistics derived from patent references with traditional citations

from papers. We found that only a small fraction—4%—of papers ever got cited by patents. These papers

are mainly from Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Allergy and Immunology, Cell Biology, and Chemistry,

9



Biochemistry

Molecular Biology

Allergy and Immunology

Cell Biology

Chemistry

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

Similarity

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

A

B

0.0

0.0

80

85

90

95

100

Percentile

80

85

90

95

100

Percentile

Figure A.1: Similarity between top papers in diﬀerent ﬁelds. (A) top papers by CP and CA. (B) top papers by BP and BA.

and are published in leading biomedical journals. For these papers, there is a positive correlation between

the number of patent and paper citations, although the magnitude is low, leaving much variations to be

explained by other factors. The comparison between the curves of yearly patent and paper citations reveals

that the majority of papers got their ﬁrst and maximum paper citation before obtaining patent citations,

highlighting diﬀerent life-cycles of citation dynamics.

Future work is needed to uncover factors that explain the diﬀerence between patent and paper citations

and examine more closely the context of patent citations. E.g., what are the technological classes of citing

patents and what are the ﬁelds of cited papers?

To what extent publicly-ﬁnanced papers are cited by

private-sector patents? Answers to these questions would contribute further to the understanding of the

technological impact of scientiﬁc research.


## Acknowledgments


I thank the anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions and Aditya Tandon for helping

with retrieving Web of Science data, which is provided by the Indiana University Network Science Institute.


## Appendix A.


10



Table A.1: Field-speciﬁc rankings of top 10 journals by the total number of patent citations. We focus on the top 6 most cited

ﬁelds listed in Table 3. For each journal, we report the same set of statistics as in Table 3.

Biochemistry

Science

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

J. Biol. Chem

146, 369

24.26

34, 403

23.99

20.73

PNAS

211, 529

42.66

27, 268

47.79

23.72

Nucleic Acids Res.

62, 952

10.43

8, 165

5.69

22.12

Science

146, 331

29.51

12, 378

21.70

7.60

Biochemistry

46, 052

7.63

9, 795

6.83

16.05

Nature

117, 947

23.79

11, 508

20.17

11.53

Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.

35, 590

5.90

9, 013

6.29

12.00

Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.

10, 359

2.09

3, 372

5.91

7.15

Biochim. Biophys. Acta

25, 599

4.24

7, 443

5.19

8.08

Scientiﬁc American

2, 672

0.54

407

0.71

7.87

Anal. Biochem.

23, 093

3.83

4, 548

3.17

18.17

Nat. Mater.

1, 958

0.39

318

0.56

12.55

FEBS Lett.

22, 607

3.75

5, 803

4.05

13.42

Experientia

1, 630

0.33

589

1.03

2.88

Biochem. J.

17, 935

2.97

5, 318

3.71

9.91

Clinical Science

1, 184

0.24

395

0.69

5.60


## Methods Enzymol.


17, 172

2.85

2, 893

2.02

15.79

Die Naturwissenschaften

494

0.10

105

0.18

2.06

FEBS J.

15, 671

2.60

4, 305

3.00

16.01

PloS ONE

336

0.07

236

0.41

0.29

Molecular Biology

Allergy and Immunology

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

EMBO J.

30, 232

10.72

4, 990

7.94

29.59

J. Immunol.

54, 523

22.43

11, 903

20.22

19.82

Mol. Cell. Biol.

26, 616

9.43

5, 241

8.34

24.78

J. Exp. Med.

29, 478

12.13

5, 002

8.50

22.59

Gene

25, 893

9.18

4, 206

6.69

24.91

Infect. Immun.

24, 129

9.93

6, 462

10.98

22.07

J. Mol. Biol.

24, 384

8.64

3, 991

6.35

13.56

J. Immunol. Methods

12, 066

4.96

2, 651

4.50

25.14

Nat. Med.

12, 958

4.59

1, 795

2.86

23.04

Eur. J. Immunol

10, 398

4.28

2, 407

4.09

17.38

Oncogene

11, 661

4.13

3, 187

5.07

19.70

Vaccine

8, 782

3.61

2, 361

4.01

14.88

Genes Dev.

9, 993

3.54

1, 892

3.01

27.42

Mol. Immunol.

5, 911

2.43

1, 086

1.84

16.72

Plant Molecular Biology

8, 593

3.05

1, 781

2.83

28.14

Immunol. Today

4, 871

2.00

681

1.16

23.23

Mol. Pharmacol.

6, 549

2.32

1, 741

2.77

16.39

Annu. Rev. Immunol.

4, 827

1.99

430

0.73

53.95

Mol. Microbiol.

6, 452

2.29

1, 846

2.94

16.41

Immunology

4, 068

1.67

1, 267

2.15

10.96

Cell Biology

Chemistry

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

Journal

# C

% C

# P

% P

% Pub.

Cell

61, 696

31.13

6, 265

14.92

37.77

J. Med. Chem.

69, 438

39.56

10, 795

24.51

42.95

Mol. Cell. Biol.

26, 616

13.43

5, 241

12.48

24.78

J. Am. Chem. Soc.

15, 990

9.11

4, 996

11.34

10.96

J. Cell Biol.

16, 627

8.39

3, 744

8.91

18.63

Bioorganic Med. Chem. Lett.

12, 341

7.03

3, 239

7.35

17.92

Plant Cell

8, 021

4.05

1, 383

3.29

27.59

J. Org. Chem.

9, 716

5.54

2, 993

6.80

13.98

Exp. Cell Res.

5, 527

2.79

1, 735

4.13

8.72

Chem. Pharm. Bull.

7, 306

4.16

2, 009

4.56

14.26

Plant Journal

5, 185

2.62

1, 117

2.66

19.59

J. Neurochem.

6, 328

3.60

2, 135

4.85

8.61

J. Cell. Physiol.

3, 833

1.93

1, 153

2.75

9.88

Angewandte Chemie

5, 168

2.94

1, 740

3.95

8.49

J. Cell Sci.

3, 822

1.93

1, 273

3.03

9.78

Bioorganic Med. Chem.

5, 083

2.90

1, 509

3.43

13.74

Cytometry

3, 186

1.61

737

1.75

26.26

Chem. Rev.

4, 663

2.66

630

1.43

25.70

J. Cell. Biochem.

2, 865

1.45

811

1.93

10.67

Chemistry & Biology

3, 926

2.24

649

1.47

22.31

Table A.2: Top 10 papers by total number of citations from USPTO-issued patents. For brevity, the “Author” column only

lists the ﬁrst author.

PMID

CP

CA

Author

Title

Year

Journal

2315699

2748

385

JU Bowie

Deciphering the message in protein sequences: tolerance to amino

1990

Science

acid substitutions

8844166

2014

125

Y Eshed

Less-than-additive epistatic interactions of quantitative trait loci

1996

Genetics

in tomato

3285178

1938

44

E Lazar

Transforming growth factor alpha: mutation of aspartic acid 47

1988

Mol. Cell. Biol.

and leucine 48 results in different biological activities

1699952

1770

92

WH Burgess

Possible dissociation of the heparin-binding and mitogenic

1990

J. Cell Biol.

activities of heparin-binding (acidic fibroblast) growth factor-1

from its receptor-binding activities by site-directed mutagenesis

of a single lysine residue

1172191

1749

11000

G K¨ohler

Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined

1975

Nature

specificity

9305836

1604

1053

IM Verma

Gene therapy – promises, problems and prospects

1997

Nature

10631780

1499

78

J Skolnick

From genes to protein structure and function: novel applications

2000

Trends Biotechnol.

of computational approaches in the genomic era

11325474

1473

276

SR Vippagunta

Crystalline solids

2001

Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.

2271534

1266

506

JA Wells

Additivity of mutational effects in proteins

1990

Biochemistry

2231712

1235

35800

SF Altschul

Basic local alignment search tool

1990

J. Mol. Biol.

Table A.3: Top 10 papers by total number of citations from papers.

PMID

CP

CA

Author

Title

Year

Journal

14907713

247

275527

OH Lowry

Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent

1951

J. Biol. Chem.

5432063

942

198137

UK Laemmli

Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of

1970

Nature

bacteriophage T4

942051

568

145074

MM Bradford

A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram

1976

Anal. Biochem.

quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding

271968

1164

62573

F Sanger

DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors

1977

PNAS

2440339

569

59607

P Chomczynski

Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium

1987

Anal. Biochem.

thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction

388439

360

50513

H Towbin

Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to

1979

PNAS

nitrocellulose sheets: procedure and some applications

13428781

51

41232

J Folch

A simple method for the isolation and purification of total lipides

1957

J. Biol. Chem.

from animal tissues

7984417

158

38418

JD Thompson

CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple

1994

Nucleic Acids Res.

sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific

gap penalties and weight matrix choice

2231712

1235

35800

SF Altschul

Basic local alignment search tool

1990

J. Mol. Biol.

18156677

2

34459

GM Sheldrick

A short history of SHELX

2008

Acta Crystallogr. A

11



Table A.4: Top 10 delayed-recognition papers measured based on patent citations.

PMID

BP

BA

CP

CA

Author

Title

Year

Journal

6804947

1244

0

1180

96

S Rudikoff

Single amino acid substitution altering antigen-binding specificity

1982

PNAS

1353878

1084

2

318

10

PC Huettner

Neu oncogene expression in ovarian tumors: a quantitative study

1992

Mod. Pathol.

8404593

1013

1

325

28

B Freyschuss

Induction of the estrogen receptor by growth hormone and

1993

Endocrinology

glucocorticoid substitution in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes

1463873

993

0

294

6

E H¨ahnel

Expression of the pS2 gene in breast tissues assessed by

1992

Breast Cancer Res. Treat.

pS2-mRNA analysis and pS2-protein radioimmunoassay

7507349

981

4

314

17

E Jacquemin

Developmental regulation of acidic fibroblast growth factor

1993

Int. J. Dev. Biol.

(aFGF) expression in bovine retina

833720

939

116

1012

211

SM Berge

Pharmaceutical salts

1977

J. Pharm. Sci.

8048062

935

0

323

82

ME Hahn

Regulation of cytochrome P4501A1 in teleosts: sustained induction

1994

Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.

of CYP1A1 mRNA, protein, and catalytic activity by

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran in the marine fish Stenotomus chrysops

8275492

922

0

322

172

I Husain

Elevation of topoisomerase I messenger RNA, protein, and catalytic

1994

Cancer Res.

activity in human tumors: demonstration of tumor-type specificity

and implications for cancer chemotherapy

7741759

856

1

325

64

J George

Pre-translational regulation of cytochrome P450 genes is responsible

1995

Biochem. Pharmacol.

for disease-specific changes of individual P450 enzymes among

patients with cirrhosis

6136691

808

30

131

16

P Svedman

Irrigation treatment of leg ulcers

1983

Lancet

Table A.5: Top 10 delayed-recognition papers measured based on paper citations.

PMID

BP

BA

CP

CA

Author

Title

Year

Journal

3899825

47

553

18

11308

DR Matthews

Homeostasis model assessment: insulin resistance and beta-cell

1985

Diabetologia

function from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations

in man

728692

32

464

3

2683

RC Young

A rating scale for mania: reliability, validity and sensitivity

1978

Br. J. Psychiatry

477100

11

448

2

1553

TA Gruen

“Modes of failure” of cemented stem-type femoral components:

1979

Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.

a radiographic analysis of loosening

976387

27

374

12

658

AJ Friedenstein

Fibroblast precursors in normal and irradiated mouse

1976

Exp. Hematol.

hematopoietic organs

4028566

13

322

2

1167

Y Tegner

Rating systems in the evaluation of knee ligament injuries

1985

Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.

7018783

24

313

27

800

M Jarcho

Calcium phosphate ceramics as hard tissue prosthetics

1981

Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res.

843571

31

287

4

13251

JR Landis

The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data

1977

Biometrics

70454

13

267

2

89

GW Zack

Automatic measurement of sister chromatid exchange frequency

1977

J. Histochem. Cytochem.

776922

22

241

8

264

ML Landsman

Light-absorbing properties, stability, and spectral stabilization

1976

J. Appl. Physiol.

of indocyanine green

641088

20

220

4

569

GE Lewinnek

Dislocations after total hip-replacement arthroplasties

1978

J. Bone Jt. Surg

12




## References


Ahmadpoor, M., & Jones, B. F. (2017). The dual frontier: Patented inventions and prior scientiﬁc advance. Science, 357,

583–587. doi:10.1126/science.aam9527.

Alc´acer, J., & Gittelman, M. (2006). Patent citations as a measure of knowledge ﬂows: The inﬂuence of examiner citations.

Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 774–779. doi:10.1162/rest.88.4.774.

Alc´acer, J., Gittelman, M., & Sampat, B. (2009). Applicant and examiner citations in U.S. patents: An overview and analysis.

Research Policy, 38, 415–427. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2008.12.001.

Alstott, J., Bullmore, E., & Plenz, D. (2014). powerlaw: A python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distributions. PLOS

ONE, 9, e85777. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0085777.

Azoulay, P., Zivin, J. S. G., Li, D., & Sampat, B. N. (2017). Public R&D Investments and Private-sector Patenting: Evidence

from NIH Funding Rules. Working Paper 20889 National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w20889.

Azoulay, P., Zivin, J. S. G., & Sampat, B. N. (2011). The diﬀusion of scientiﬁc knowledge across time and space: Evidence

from professional transitions for the superstars of medicine. In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited (pp.

107–155). University of Chicago Press. URL: http://www.nber.org/chapters/c12350.

Bowie, J., Reidhaar-Olson, J., Lim, W., & Sauer, R. (1990). Deciphering the message in protein sequences: tolerance to amino

acid substitutions. Science, 247, 1306–1310. doi:10.1126/science.2315699.

Callaert, J., Pellens, M., & Looy, B. V. (2014).

Sources of inspiration?

making sense of scientiﬁc references in patents.

Scientometrics, 98, 1617–1629. doi:10.1007/s11192-013-1073-x.

Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., & Newman, M. E. J. (2009). Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM Review, 51, 661–703.

doi:10.1137/070710111.

Davis, P., & Papanek, G. F. (1984). Faculty ratings of major economics departments by citations. American Economic Review,

74, 225–230.

Ding, C. G., Hung, W.-C., Lee, M.-C., & Wang, H.-J. (2017). Exploring paper characteristics that facilitate the knowledge

ﬂow from science to technology. Journal of Informetrics, 11, 244–256. doi:10.1016/j.joi.2016.12.004.

Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2004). Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management Journal, 25, 909–928.

doi:10.1002/smj.384.

Grant, J., Cottrell, R., Cluzeau, F., & Fawcett, G. (2000). Evaluating “payback” on biomedical research from papers cited in

clinical guidelines: applied bibliometric study. BMJ, 320, 1107–1111. doi:10.1136/bmj.320.7242.1107.

Hirsch, J. E. (2005). An index to quantify an individual’s scientiﬁc research output. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences, 102, 16569–16572. doi:10.1073/pnas.0507655102.

Jaﬀe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent

citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 577–598. doi:10.2307/2118401.

Ke, Q., Ferrara, E., Radicchi, F., & Flammini, A. (2015). Deﬁning and identifying Sleeping Beauties in science. Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 7426–7431. doi:10.1073/pnas.1424329112.

King, D. A. (2004). The scientiﬁc impact of nations. Nature, 430, 311–316. doi:10.1038/430311a.

Lemley, M. A., & Sampat, B. (2012). Examiner characteristics and patent oﬃce outcomes. The Review of Economics and

Statistics, 94, 817–827. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00194.

Li, D., Azoulay, P., & Sampat, B. N. (2017). The applied value of public investments in biomedical research. Science, 356,

78–81. doi:10.1126/science.aal0010.

McMillan, G. S., Narin, F., & Deeds, D. L. (2000). An analysis of the critical role of public science in innovation: the case of

biotechnology. Research Policy, 29, 1–8. doi:10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00030-X.

Meyer, M. (2000). Does science push technology? patents citing scientiﬁc literature. Research Policy, 29, 409–434. doi:10.

1016/S0048-7333(99)00040-2.

Meyer, M. (2002). Tracing knowledge ﬂows in innovation systems. Scientometrics, 54, 193–212. doi:10.1023/A:1016057727209.

Mosmann, T. (1983). Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: Application to proliferation and cytotoxicity

assays. Journal of Immunological Methods, 65, 55–63. doi:10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4.

Narin, F., Hamilton, K. S., & Olivastro, D. (1997). The increasing linkage between U.S. technology and public science. Research

Policy, 26, 317–330. doi:10.1016/S0048-7333(97)00013-9.

Narin, F., & Olivastro, D. (1992). Status report: Linkage between technology and science. Research Policy, 21, 237–249.

doi:10.1016/0048-7333(92)90018-Y.

Narin, F., Pinski, G., & Gee, H. H. (1976).

Structure of the biomedical literature.

Journal of the American Society for

Information Science, 27, 25–45. doi:10.1002/asi.4630270104.

Noorden, R. V., Maher, B., & Nuzzo, R. (2014). The top 100 papers. Nature, 514, 550–553. doi:10.1038/514550a.

Phillips, D. P., Kanter, E. J., Bednarczyk, B., & Tastad, P. L. (1991).

Importance of the lay press in the transmission

of medical knowledge to the scientiﬁc community.

New England Journal of Medicine, 325, 1180–1183. doi:10.1056/

NEJM199110173251620.

van Raan, A. F. J. (2017). Sleeping beauties cited in patents: Is there also a dormitory of inventions? Scientometrics, 110,

1123–1156. doi:10.1007/s11192-016-2215-8.

Rosvall, M., & Bergstrom, C. T. (2008). Maps of random walks on complex networks reveal community structure. Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 1118–1123. doi:10.1073/pnas.0706851105.

Rosvall, M., & Bergstrom, C. T. (2010). Mapping change in large networks. PLOS ONE, 5, e8694. doi:10.1371/journal.

pone.0008694.

Shen, H.-W., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2014). Collective credit allocation in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

111, 12325–12330. doi:10.1073/pnas.1401992111.

13



Shwed, U., & Bearman, P. S. (2010). The temporal structure of scientiﬁc consensus formation. American Sociological Review,

75, 817–840. doi:10.1177/0003122410388488.

Sinatra, R., Deville, P., Szell, M., Wang, D., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2015). A century of physics. Nature Physics, 11, 791–796.

doi:10.1038/nphys3494.

Sinatra, R., Wang, D., Deville, P., Song, C., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2016). Quantifying the evolution of individual scientiﬁc impact.

Science, 354, aaf5239. doi:10.1126/science.aaf5239.

Stigler, S. M. (1994). Citation patterns in the journals of statistics and probability. Statistical Science, 9, 94–108. doi:10.

1214/ss/1177010655.

Thelwall, M., Haustein, S., Larivi`ere, V., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2013). Do altmetrics work? twitter and ten other social web

services. PLOS ONE, 8, e64841. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064841.

Varin, C., Cattelan, M., & Firth, D. (2016). Statistical modelling of citation exchange between statistics journals. Journal of

the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 179, 1–63. doi:10.1111/rssa.12124.

Wang, D., Song, C., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2013). Quantifying long-term scientiﬁc impact. Science, 342, 127–132. doi:10.1126/

science.1237825.

Williams, R. S., Lotia, S., Holloway, A. K., & Pico, A. R. (2015). From scientiﬁc discovery to cures: Bright stars within a

galaxy. Cell, 163, 21–23. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.007.

14