The citation advantage of foreign language references for Chinese

social science papers

Kaile Gong1,2, Juan Xie1, Ying Cheng1, Vincent Larivière3, Cassidy R. Sugimoto2,*

1 School of Information Management, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Road, Nanjing,

Jiangsu 210023, China

2 School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University Bloomington, 901

East 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47408, USA

3 École de bibliothéconomie et des sciences de l’information, Université de Montréal, C.P.

6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada

* Corresponding author. Email: sugimoto@indiana.edu


## Abstract  Contemporary scientific exchanges are international, yet language continues to be a


persistent barrier to scientific communication, particularly for non-native English-speaking

scholars. Since the ability to absorb knowledge has a strong impact on how researchers create new

scientific knowledge, a comprehensive access to and understanding of both domestic and

international scientific publications is essential for scientific performance. This study explores the

effect of absorbed knowledge on research impact by analyzing the relationship between the

language diversity of cited references and the number of citations received by the citing paper.

Chinese social sciences are taken as the research object, and the data, 950,302 papers published

between 1998 and 2013 with 8,151,327 cited references, were collected from the Chinese Social

Sciences Citation Index (CSSCI). Results show that there is a stark increase in the consumption of

foreign language material within the Chinese social science community, and English material

accounts for the vast majority of this consumption. Papers with foreign language references

receive significantly more citations than those without, and the citation advantage of these

internationalized work holds when we control for characteristics of the citing papers, such as the

discipline, prestige of journal, prestige of institution, and scientific collaboration. However, the

citation advantage has decreased from 1998 to 2008, largely as an artifact of the increased number

of papers citing foreign language material. After 2008, however, the decline of the citation

advantage subsided and became relatively stable, which suggests that incorporating foreign

language literature continues to increase scientific impact, even as the scientific community itself

becomes increasingly international. However, internationalization is not without concerns: the

work closes with a discussion of the benefits and potential problems of the lack of linguistic

diversity in scientific communication.



Keywords  References; Citations; Social sciences; China; Globalization; Lingua franca


## 1. Introduction


Contemporary scientific exchanges are international. Researchers collaborate with colleagues

from other countries, migrate for short- or long-term positions, and attend academic conferences



in far flung places. These international exchanges have a positive influence on scientific impact

(Aksnes 2003; Sugimoto et al. 2017). However, language barriers remain one of the main

obstacles to international scientific communication and dissemination of knowledge, despite

increasingly efficient translation tools. This barrier is growing for non-native English-speaking

scholars, as scientists increasingly publish in English, even in the social sciences and humanities

(Kulczycki et al. 2017; Larivière 2018). This language barrier is one of both access and

understanding: scholars are only able to access the information in languages in which they have

high literacy and, even with advanced literacy, full absorption of content may be lessened for

non-native speakers (Liu 2017). An old Chinese saying states: “Only by learning extensively and

accumulating profound knowledge can one be ready to achieve something”. Taken as a metaphor

for scientific success, one might hypothesize that without full access to the scientific literature,

success may be limited. In short, the lack of ability to absorb international scientific literature may

lessen the potential for scientific impact.

Citations are a generally accepted indicator of scientific impact; they indicate the degree to

which a cited article influenced subsequent scientific work (Bornmann and Daniel 2008).

However, they are often misconstrued as indicators of quality (Borgman and Furner 2002), despite

demonstrations to the contrary (Nieminen et al. 2006). This is largely due to the wide

heterogeneity in referencing motivation (Bornmann 2016; Wang et al. 2018), wherein a work may

be cited not due to the quality of the work but for a variety of factors. The main underlying factor

was evoked by Merton’s (1988) characterization of citations as “pellets of peer recognition”; that

is, a reference serves the function of indicators of the impact (whether positive or negative) of the

past work upon the present. In this way, references can be seen as a proxy for knowledge

transmission and absorption. References and citations are two sides of the same coin: if references

are made for a variety of reasons, so too are citations received. In a comprehensive review,

Tahamtan et al. (2016) identified several factors that affect papers’ citation counts, including

paper-, journal-, and author-related factors.

One paper-related factor is the references within a paper. Several studies have explored the

relationship between a paper’s citation count and the characteristics of its references. Authors have

demonstrated a positive relationship between citation count and number of references (e.g.,

Antoniou et al. 2015; Biscaro and Giupponi 2014; Bornmann et al. 2014; Chen 2012; Didegah and

Thelwall 2013; Falagas et al. 2013; Gargouri et al. 2010; Haslam and Koval 2010; Lokker et al.

2008; Mou et al. 2018; Onodera and Yoshikane 2015; Roth et al. 2012; So et al. 2015; van Wesel

et al. 2014; Yu and Yu 2014; Yu et al. 2014), citedness of references (Bornmann et al. 2012; Mou

et al. 2018), age of references (Roth et al. 2012), interdisciplinarity of references (Chakraborty et

al. 2014), and document types of references (Miranda and Garcia-Carpintero 2018; Mou et al.

2018). These previous studies suggest that the number, diversity, prestige, and timeliness of

absorbed knowledge can affect scientific impact of a published work.

Discovering new scientific knowledge combines both understanding and absorbing the

current state of a field, but also creating, inventing, and obtaining new results, concepts, and ideas

(Cheng 2009; Qiu et al. 2016). Therefore, the ability to absorb current knowledge has a significant

impact on how researchers create new knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal 1990). It may be

hypothesized that language barriers—evidenced by the diversity in the language of cited


## references—may lessen the potential for scientific impact. Previous research has found several


factors that influence papers citing foreign language literature (Gong et al. 2018). For example, in



terms of publications written in Chinese, there are more foreign language literature cited by papers

published in prestigious journals (Gong et al. 2018). Since papers published in prestigious journals

tend to receive more citations (Callaham et al. 2002), one can hypothesize that this effect is also

observed at the level of Chinese literature. In addition, other factors such as the discipline, prestige

of institution and scientific collaboration were also widely proved to influence both citing

behavior and citations received (Bornmann and Daniel 2008; Tahamtan et al. 2016). To better

understand the factors affecting citation rates, this paper aims to explore the effect of absorbed

knowledge on research impact by analyzing the relationship between the language diversity of

cited references and the number of citations received by the citing paper. Specifically, three

research questions are addressed in the current study:

RQ1. Do papers with foreign language references receive more citations than those without?

RQ2. Does the citation advantage of papers with foreign language references decrease as

their proportion increases?

RQ3. Does the citation advantage of papers with foreign language references remain after

controlling the widely-recognized characteristics of citing papers?


## 2. Data and Methods


2.1 Research objects

Chinese social sciences are selected for the analysis for three reasons. Firstly, compared with

natural scientists who have universal research objects and paradigms, social scientists tend to

publish papers in local journals in their native language because their research purposes, problems,

and objects are often closely related to the social environment and culture where they reside, and

tend to have greater relevance within that specific region (Gingras and Mosbah-Natanson 2010;

Warren 2004). Correspondingly, the knowledge on which they rely is more likely to be in their

native language (Kulczycki et al. 2017; Larivière 2018; Yitzhaki 1998). Therefore, the issue of

language may be more applicable to the social, rather than the natural sciences.

Secondly, over the course of the 20th century, English became the scientific lingua franca

(Gordin 2015; Montgomery 2013). However, the 21st century is witnessing a strong increasing in

the scientific output of China. China has been the largest producer of scholarly publications in the

world since 2016 (National Science Foundation 2018), as measured by Scopus, which has a

demonstrated bias for English-language material. The fact that a non-English-speaking country is

the largest producer of scholarly papers, combined with the high homophily of referencing

practices observed across country (Larivière et al. 2019)—bears examination of how the

referencing practices of Chinese papers have evolved over time, particularly with regards to

referencing English-language material.

Thirdly, China is increasingly active in social science research—despite not being as central

to international scientific exchanges as in the natural and medical sciences (Liu et al. 2015; Zhou

et al. 2009). Such growth can be associated with increased international interest in China, as well

as, reciprocally, of the increasing openness of Chinese scholars in international academic



exchange. While we know the extent to which Chinese social sciences researchers publishing in

international journals—as represented by the Web of Science and Scopus—little is known on the

use of English-language journals in Chinese literature of the social sciences.

2.2 Data collection

The data were collected in April 2019 from the Chinese Social Sciences Citation Index

(CSSCI), which was created in 1998 by the Institute for Chinese Social Science Research and

Assessment of Nanjing University. CSSCI was chosen as the data source because it is widely

recognized as a China’s leading, authoritative, and comprehensive database for scholarly citations,

and it includes more than 600 high-impact journals in the fields of the humanities and social

sciences (Wang et al. 2016). These journals are selected from among more than 2700 Chinese

language journals in the field of humanities and social sciences based on quantitative indicators

and qualitative peer review (Institute for Chinese Social Science Research and Assessment of

Nanjing University 2016). The CSSCI database records rich metadata, such as title, authors,

institutions, discipline, journal, keywords, references, and citation count within the CSSCI, which

allows for the compilation of bibliometrics indicators.

CSSCI-indexed journals are sponsored by Chinese institutions and primarily published in

China by authors affiliated by Chinese institutions. By 2018, less than 2% (n= 25,504; 1.49%) of

CSSCI-indexed papers have authors from other countries and only 454 papers are not written in

Chinese, accounting for 0.027% of the total papers. Among these 454 papers, only 38 have authors

from other countries. Therefore, this strongly represents a nationalistic output of scholarly

publications.

A total of 950,302 papers (and 8,151,327 cited references) from all 13 social science

disciplines indexed by CSSCI from 1998 to 2013 are included, all of which are written in the

Chinese language. In order to have a five-year citation window for all papers, papers published

2014 onwards are excluded from our analysis. Publications in this study are categorized into one

or two of 13 disciplines: Economics (Econ), Education (Ed), Environmental Studies (Evs), Human

& Economic Geography (Geo), Journalism & Communication (Jcom), Law (Law), Library &

Information Science (Lis), Management (Mgmt), Political Science (Pols), Psychology (Psy),

Sociology (Soc), Sports Science (Sps), and Statistics (Stat).

2.3 Papers’ features coding

Each paper is coded for the following seven items:


## 1. With or without foreign language references: Code the paper as “Papers with foreign


language references” (PFLR) or “Papers without foreign language references” (PNLR).

The identification of each reference’s language is the basis of this study. The language of

each cited reference is tagged as a number in CSSCI dataset (Su et al. 2014). The tagging

rule is: Chinese-01, English-02, German-03, French-04, Russian-05, Japanese-06,

Others-07, Translation-09 (to Chinese), and Korean-99. Using these data, all citing papers

are coded into one of two binary categories according to the following rules: coding the



citing paper as PFLR if it has at least one reference tagged as 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 07 or 99;

otherwise, coding it as PNLR. Hereby, 337,043 (35.5%) papers are coded as PFLR, and

613,259 (64.5%) papers are coded as PNLR. Meanwhile, Figure 1 shows that English


## references account for the vast majority (96.4%) of foreign language references, and the


percentage of English references continued to raise while that of other languages

decreased. Thus, to some extent, the foreign language references almost exclusively refer

to English references in this study.

Fig. 1 The percentage of references in different languages, by year


## 2. Published year: Code the paper by the published year. The number and percentage of


papers in each year are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Number and percentage of papers, by published year

Year

Number of papers

Percentage of papers

1998

42,095

4.4

1999

47,566

5.0

2000

44,781

4.7

2001

46,943

4.9

2002

49,974

5.3

2003

53,020

5.6

2004

57,804

6.1

2005

60,914

6.4

2006

65,815

6.9

2007

68,624

7.2

2008

71,864

7.6

2009

72,576

7.6

2010

68,101

7.2

2011

68,111

7.2

2012

66,864

7.0



2013

65,250

6.9


## 3. Discipline: Code the paper as the disciplines that were tagged by CSSCI in the database.


Since CSSCI tagged each paper into at most two disciplines, each paper in this study is

associated with one or two discipline code(s). As noted above, there are 13 disciplines

included in this study, the number and percentage of papers from each discipline are

shown in Table 2. What needs illustration is that the sum of numbers is greater than

950,302 and the sum of percentages is greater than 100% is because of the

multi-disciplinary coding rule for each paper. We use full counting in the analyses by

discipline.

Table 2 Number and percentage of papers, by discipline

Discipline

Number of papers

Percentage of papers

Econ

318,284

33.5

Ed

132,449

13.9

Mgmt

122,141

12.9

Lis

82,307

8.7

Pols

82,062

8.6

Jcom

76,786

8.1

Law

75,158

7.9

Soc

38,600

4.1

Sps

30,180

3.2

Evs

21,091

2.2

Psy

18,347

1.9

Geo

5,412

0.6

Stat

5,208

0.5


## 4. Prestige of journal: Code the paper as “Leading journals” or “Other journals” according to


whether its journal belongs to the Catalogue of Leading Journals in Humanities and

Social Sciences1. Hereby, 48,713 (5.1%) papers are coded as “Leading journals” and

901,589 (94.9%) papers are coded as “Other journals”.


## 5. Prestige of institution: Code the paper as “Top institutions” or “Other institutions”


according to the authors’ institution(s). If there is at least one institution listed among the

39 top universities in Project 9852 or among the research institutions affiliated to two top

research organizations from the Chinese Academy of Sciences3 and Chinese Academy of

1 The Catalogue of Leading Journals in Humanities and Social Sciences was compiled by the Social Sciences

Department of Nanjing University. It contains the 31 most prestigious Chinese journals in the field of humanities

and social sciences (Office of Humanities and Social Sciences of Nanjing University 2017). The catalogue was

originally used by Nanjing University to evaluate the research performance of its faculty and students, but since

there is no unified catalogue of top journals in China, it has gradually become one of the influential criteria for

determining journal prestige in China (Chen 2016).

2 Project 985 is a project that was established by Chinese government in May 1998 to promote the development

and reputation of the Chinese higher education system by founding world-class universities in the 21st century

(Zong and Zhang 2017). There are 39 top Chinese universities sponsored by Project 985 (Ministry of Education of

the People's Republic of China 2006).

3 The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) is the world's largest research organization, comprising around 49,000

professional researchers working in more than 100 institutes (Yang et al. 2015), and has been consistently ranked



Social Sciences4, in the institution(s) list, the paper is coded as “Top institutions”.

Otherwise, it’s coded as “Other institutions”. Hereby, 327,847 (34.5%) papers are coded

as “Top institutions” and 622,455 (65.5%) papers are coded as “Other institutions”.


## 6. Scientific collaboration: Code the paper as “Co-authorship” if there are two or more


authors in the byline; otherwise, code it as “Single authorship”. Hereby, 371,167 (39.1%)

papers are coded as “Co-authorship” and 579,135 (60.9%) papers are coded as “Single

authorship”.


## 7. Citation count: The 2-year cumulative citation count (C2) and 5-year cumulative citation


count (C5) within CSSCI are calculated as the basic citation indicators of each paper.

Setting two different citation windows is partly because papers in different disciplines

have various citation half-life, it may bias the results if only one citation window is used.

In addition, the citation half-life of papers in social sciences is generally longer than

natural sciences, it’s better to set one more citation window that is longer than the

commonly used - two years. Therefore, this study uses the citation window (2 and 5

years), respectively, to calculate the C2 and C5. The average value of C2 is 0.55 and that

of C5 is 1.24.

2.4 Analysis

For the entire set of papers, we compile citations per paper (CPP), which is a common

indicator used in citation analysis (see Eq. 1). This can be denoted:

(1)

where N is the total amount of papers in a certain set and C is the amount of citations received by

these papers. The CPP therefore describes the arithmetic average of citation count of a certain

paper set, and reflects the scholarly impact of these research outputs. Based on the C2 and C5, this

study calculates the CPP with two citation windows, that is, 2-year cumulative citations per paper

(CPP2) and 5-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP5).

Citation advantage (CA) represents the citation (dis)advantage of papers with foreign

language references over those that do not contain such references. It is therefore used to measure

the impact of language diversity of absorbed knowledge on research performance (see Eq. 2). The

equation can be denoted as:

(2)

where CPPPFLR is the average citation count of papers with foreign language references and

among the top research organizations around the world (Nature index 2018). Although it concentrates on the

natural sciences, it has published more than 18,000 Chinese papers and 10,000 international papers in the field of

social sciences (the statistical results are based on the CSSCI and SSCI).

4 The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) is the premier academic organization and comprehensive

research center of China in the fields of philosophy and social sciences. It is affiliated with the PRC's State Council

and consists of 31 research institutes and 45 research centers, which carry out research activities covering nearly

300 sub-disciplines (Du 2019).



CPPPNLR is the average citation count of papers without foreign language references. CA>1 means

papers with foreign language references receive more citations than those without, on average, and

suggests the language diversity of absorbed knowledge has a positive impact on research

performance. CA<1 means the opposite. Based on the CPP2 and CPP5, this study calculates the

CA with two citation windows. These are 2-year (CA2) and 5-year (CA5) cumulative citation

advantage. As a comparative indicator, citation advantage (CA) reflects the quantitative advantage

of one paper set’s average citation count over another’s, but there is no clear threshold to define

the significance of this advantage. Therefore, further statistical tests are necessary to confirm if

there is a significant difference in citation count between papers with foreign language references

and those without. The Mann-Whitney U test is adopted in this study because the test variable,

citation count, does not conform to normal distribution (Thelwall 2016) and the grouping variable

“With or without foreign language references” is binary.

In order to answer RQ2, this study calculates the annual proportion of papers with foreign

language references (%PFLR), the annual CA2 and the annual CA5 for 1998 to 2013, and

explores their relationships.

Regression analysis is used to answer RQ3. Research by Thelwall and Wilson (2014) showed

that a better regression strategy for citation data is to “add one to the citations, take their log and

then use the general linear (ordinary least squares) model for regression (e.g., multiple linear

regression, ANOVA), or to use the generalized linear model without the log.” (p. 963). Thus, this

study converts “With or without foreign language references”, “Discipline”, “Prestige of journal”,

“Prestige of institution”, and “Scientific collaboration” to dummy variables and sets them as

independent variables, then sets log10(C5+1) as the dependent variable and uses the multiple linear

regression model (see Eq. 3) for analysis. This can be represented as

𝑙𝑜𝑔10 𝐶5𝑖+ 1 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1𝑃𝐹𝐿𝑅𝑖+ 𝑏2𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑖+ 𝑏3𝐸𝑑𝑖+ 𝑏4𝐸𝑣𝑠𝑖+ 𝑏5𝐺𝑒𝑜𝑖+ 𝑏6𝐿𝑎𝑤𝑖+ 𝑏7𝐿𝑖𝑠𝑖

+ 𝑏8𝑀𝑔𝑚𝑡𝑖+ 𝑏9𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑖+ 𝑏10𝑃𝑠𝑦𝑖+ 𝑏11𝑆𝑜𝑐𝑖+ 𝑏12𝑆𝑝𝑠𝑖+ 𝑏13𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖

+ 𝑏14𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝐽𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑖+ 𝑏15𝑇𝑜𝑝𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖+ 𝑏16𝐶𝑜𝑎𝑢𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖



(3)

where PFLRi=1 if the paper i is coded as “Papers with foreign language references” (PFLR), and

PFLRi=0 otherwise; Econi (Edi, Evsi, …, and Stati) =1 if the paper i is code as “Econ” (Ed, Evs, …,

and Stat), and Econi (Edi, Evsi, …, and Stati) =0 otherwise; LeadingJournali=1 if the paper i is

coded as “Leading journals”, and LeadingJournali=0 otherwise; TopInstitutioni=1 if the paper i is

code as “Top institutions”, and TopInstitutioni=0 otherwise; Coauthorshipi=1 if the paper i is

coded as “Co-authorship”, and Coauthorshipi=0 otherwise.


## 3. Results


3.1. Do papers with foreign language references receive more citations?

Table 3 shows the statistical results of the basic indicators. Among the 950,302 Chinese

social sciences papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR) account for 35.5% of all

papers. However, total citations received by PFLR in two years (∑C2) account for 57.0%, which



is more than those received by papers without foreign language references (PNLR). The gap

between PFLR and PNLR widens in the sum of 5-year cumulative citation count (∑C5), with the

proportion of citations received by PFLR rising to 62.5%. This demonstrates that although PFLR

make up the minority of publications, they receive the majority of citations.

Table 3 Total number of publications and citations for all papers, papers with foreign language


## references (PFLR), and papers without foreign language references (PNLR)


Number of

publications

Number of citations, two-year

Number of citations, five-year

citation window (∑C2)

citation window (∑C5)

All papers

950,302

518,113

1,180,043

PFLR

337,043

295,291

737,880

(%PFLR)

35.5

57.0

62.5

PNLR

613,259

222,822

442,163

(%PNLR)

64.5

43.0

37.5

The 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) and the 5-year cumulative citations per

paper (CPP5) of all papers, PFLR, and PNLR are presented in Figure 2. It can be seen that both

CPP2 and CPP5 of PFLR are higher than those of PNLR. In terms of the increase from CPP2 to

CPP5, PFLR is also higher than PNLR, which shows that papers with foreign language references

not only receive more citations on average, but also accumulate citations faster over the time

period studied.

Fig. 2 Average number of citations (CPP2 and CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language


## references (PFLR), and papers without foreign language references (PNLR)


In order to quantify the impact of foreign language references on citations, the 2-year

cumulative citation advantage (CA2) and the 5-year cumulative citation advantage (CA5) are

calculated. The results are CA2=2.41 and CA5=3.04, which show that papers with foreign



language references are, on average, cited more than twice as much as PNLR. In addition, the


## result that CA5 is greater than CA2 demonstrates that the gap between average citation count of


PFLR and that of PNLR becomes larger over time, suggesting that the former has a more lasting

academic impact than the latter. Taking “With or without foreign language references” as the

grouping variable, Mann-Whitney U test is separately performed on C2 and C5. As shown in

Table 4, in both tests for C2 and C5, there is a significant difference between the citation count of

PFLR and that of PNLR (p<0.001).

Table 4 Difference of citation count (C2 and C5) between papers with foreign language references

(PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR), compared using a

Mann-Whitney U test a

C2

C5

Mann-Whitney U

8.345E+10

7.264E+10

Wilcoxon W

2.715E+11

2.607E+11

Z

-198.822

-271.637

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

a. Grouping Variable: With or without foreign language references



Based on the above analyses, the answer to RQ1 is that the papers with foreign language


## references receive more citations than those without, and that this gap is wider in terms of


long-term citations.

3.2. Does the CA decrease as the %PFLR increases?

Figure 3A presents the annual proportion of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR)

for 1998 to 2013. It can be seen that %PFLR continuously increased from 1998 to 2013. In 1998,

only 11.7% of Chinese social sciences papers cited foreign language literature. However, the

percentage grew to 54.4% in 2013, which means that more than half of these papers published in

2013 have cited foreign language literature.

Figure 3B shows the diachronic trends of the 2-year cumulative citation advantage (CA2) and

the 5-year cumulative citation advantage (CA5). It can be seen that both CA2 and CA5 show

downward trends before 2008, which indicates that the advantage of PFLR in citations gradually

narrowed from 1998 to 2008. In other words, the positive citation impact of citing foreign

language literature has gradually weakened from 1998 to 2008. However, after 2008, both CA2

and CA5 were no longer in continuous decline, but remained relatively stable around 2 and 2.5. It

demonstrates that there is a continuous relationship between citing foreign literature and receiving

citations, and the number of citations received by PFLR is always about twice or more than that

received by PNLR.

In response to RQ2, we find, by combining the Figure 3A and B, that the citation advantage

of papers with foreign language references decreased as their proportion increased in the early

years (from 1998 to 2008). But after 2008, although the proportion of papers with foreign

language references continued to increase, their citation advantage still existed and remained

relatively stable.



Figure 3. A) Percentage of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR) and B) 2-year (CA2)

and 5-year (CA5) cumulative citation advantage from 1998 to 2013

3.3. Does the CA still exist after controlling for other characteristics of citing

papers?

3.3.1 Discipline

The analyses presented above focused on the social sciences as a whole. However, subfields

of the social sciences vary in their research objects and citation behaviors (Bornmann and Daniel

2008; Tahamtan et al. 2016). Scholars working on localized objects and topics may naturally focus

more on the domestic knowledge source (Gingras and Mosbah-Natanson 2010; Larivière 2018;

Warren 2004). On the other hand, the difference of citation behavior also leads to the

interdisciplinary gap in the possibility of receiving citations, which is the reason why journal

impact factors cannot be compared across disciplines (Dorta-González and Dorta-González 2013;

Sugimoto and Larivière 2018). To address these differences, we examine the relationship between

foreign language citing and citations received for papers in each of the 13 disciplines.

The proportion of papers citing foreign language references (%PFLR) of different disciplines

is shown in Figure 4. Papers in psychology are most likely to draw upon foreign language


## references, with a %PFLR of 81.6%. This is contrasted with Journalism & Communication, which


is at 10.7% -- less than one seventh of the rate of Psychology. About half of the papers from

Management (%PFLR=48.0%) cite foreign literature. Considering the large amount of Chinese

papers on Management, it suggests higher rates of international engagement with literature for this

discipline. In addition to Journalism & Communication, other disciplines with lower %PFLR

include Sports Science (%PFLR=30.0%), Political Science (%PFLR=29.2%), and Education

(%PFLR=27.2%), indicating Chinese scholars largely rely on local language papers in these

knowledge communities. These results converge with those obtained by He (2008): disciplines in

which researchers from China are more likely to publish in SSCI- and A&HCI-indexed journals

rather than CSSCI-indexed ones are also those with a larger %PFLR.



Fig. 4 Percentage of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR), by discipline

Figure 5 and 6 present the 2-year (CPP2) and 5-year (CPP5) cumulative citations per paper

for all papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR), and those without foreign

language references (PNLR) in each discipline. While citation rates vary across disciplines, results

show that, in each discipline, papers with foreign language references obtain more citations than

those without such references.

Fig. 5 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) for all papers, papers with foreign language


## references (PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR), by discipline




Fig. 6 5-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language


## references (PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR), by discipline


Figures 5 and 6 show that, regardless of in which discipline, the CPP2 of PFLR is always

greater than that of PNLR, and so is the CPP5. This demonstrates that, despite disciplinary

differences in citation rates, there remains an invariant relationship between citing foreign

language literature and receiving citations. In order to further quantify the citation advantage of

PFLR in each discipline, the citation advantages (CA2 and CA5) are calculated by discipline

(Table 5). It can be seen that the CA2 of all disciplines except Law, Library & Information Science,

and Sports Science are greater than two, which means that the average citation count of PFLR is

more than twice larger than that of PNLR. Sports Science has the lowest CA2 at 1.20, but still

greater than 1. Disciplines with larger CA2 also have the larger CA5, and the CA5 of Sports

Science is still the smallest at 1.24. In addition, the citation advantage of PFLR expands with the

extension of citation window in all disciplines, which suggests that PFLR have a faster citation

speed in all disciplines. Taking “With or without foreign language references” as the grouping

variable, Mann-Whitney U test is separately performed on the C2 and C5 in each discipline. As

shown in Table 6, in all tests for C2 and C5, there is a significant difference between the citation

count of PFLR and PNLR (p<0.001). On the whole, in all disciplines, papers with foreign

language references receive more citation than those without.



Table 5 2-year (CA2) and 5-year (CA5) cumulative citation advantage, by discipline

Discipline

Psy

Mgmt

Stat

Econ

Evs

Law

Soc

Geo

Lis

Sps

Pols

Ed

Jcom

CA2

2.67

2.89

4.68

2.67

2.77

1.79

2.16

2.11

1.97

1.20

2.51

2.11

2.35

CA5

2.97

3.81

5.00

3.52

3.09

1.99

2.60

2.46

2.25

1.24

2.83

2.39

2.56

Table 6 Difference of citation count (C2 and C5) between papers with foreign language references (PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR)

in each discipline, compared using a Mann-Whitney U test a

Discipline

C2



C5

Mann-Whitney U Wilcoxon W

Z

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)  Mann-Whitney U Wilcoxon W

Z

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)

Psy

2.000E+07

2.570E+07

-22.643

.000



1.677E+07

2.247E+07

-32.298

.000

Mgmt

1.433E+09

3.450E+09

-86.556

.000



1.196E+09

3.213E+09

-119.11

.000

Stat

2.274E+06

7.056E+06

-24.98

.000



1.807E+06

6.589E+06

-31.575

.000

Econ

9.398E+09

2.856E+10 -128.567

.000



8.043E+09

2.721E+10 -174.844

.000

Evs

4.452E+07

1.294E+08

-27.539

.000



4.019E+07

1.250E+08

-35.539

.000

Law

5.626E+08

1.730E+09

-37.713

.000



5.185E+08

1.686E+09

-50.881

.000

Soc

1.389E+08

4.489E+08

-37.156

.000



1.232E+08

4.332E+08

-49.498

.000

Geo

2.781E+06

9.141E+06

-12.047

.000



2.399E+06

8.759E+06

-18.119

.000

Lis

6.009E+08

2.121E+09

-53.248

.000



5.384E+08

2.058E+09

-70.199

.000

Sps

9.052E+07

3.143E+08

-8.992

.000



8.715E+07

3.109E+08

-13.128

.000

Pols

5.811E+08

2.268E+09

-54.703

.000



5.187E+08

2.206E+09

-71.978

.000

Ed

1.480E+09

6.127E+09

-57.337

.000



1.320E+09

5.967E+09

-80.256

.000

Jcom

2.417E+08

2.591E+09

-33.645

.000



2.236E+08

2.573E+09

-42.251

.000

a. Grouping Variable: With or without foreign language references



3.3.2 Prestige of journal

The proportion of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR) in leading journals is

44.8%, and the %PFLR of other journals is 35.0%. Figures 7A and B show the 2-year cumulative

citations per paper (CPP2) and the 5-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP5) for all papers,

papers with foreign language references (PFLR), and papers without foreign language references

(PNLR) by prestige of journal. As for all papers, it can be found that both CPP2 and CPP5 in

leading journals are higher than those in other journals, showing that papers published in the

leading journals receive more citations than those published in other journals, supporting previous

studies (e.g., Callaham et al. 2002; Xie et al. 2018).

Figure 7. A) 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) and B) 5-year cumulative citations per

paper (CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR) and papers without

foreign language references (PNLR), by type of journals

As shown in Figure 7, CPP indicators of PFLR are always greater than those of PNLR,

irrespective of the citation window. It means that papers with foreign language references always

receive more citations than those without in both leading and regular journals. In order to further

quantify the advantage, the citation advantages (CA2 and CA5) are calculated. The CA2 of

leading journals is 3.32 while the CA2 of other journals is 2.21. The CA5 of leading journals is

4.65, while that of other journals is 2.70. All of the CA are greater than 1, and both CA2 and CA5

of leading journals are much greater than those of other journals, which suggests that the language

diversity of references has a greater impact on the citation count of papers in prestigious journals.

Taking “With or without foreign language references” as the grouping variable, a Mann-Whitney

U test is separately performed on the citation count (C2 and C5) of papers in both kinds of

journals. As shown in Table 7, there is a significant difference between the citation count of PFLR

and PNLR (p<0.001), regardless of the citation window or the prestige of journal.

Table 7 Difference of citation count (C2 and C5) between papers with foreign language references

(PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR) in leading and other journals,

compared using a Mann-Whitney U test a



Leading journals



Other journals

C2

C5



C2

C5

Mann-Whitney U

1.876E+08 1.499E+08  7.589E+10 6.635E+10

Wilcoxon W

5.489E+08

5.113E+08

2.478E+11

2.383E+11

Z

-75.802

-97.065

-181.534

-251.996

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

a. Grouping Variable: With or without foreign language references

The above shows that the citation advantage of papers with foreign language references

remains after testing for the prestige of journal.

3.3.3 Prestige of institution

The proportion of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR) of top institutions is

52.2%, while that of other institutions is 26.7%. The former is higher than the latter, suggesting

that papers from top institutions are more likely to cite foreign language references. Figures 8

shows the 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) and the 5-year cumulative citations per

paper (CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR), and papers without

foreign language references (PNLR), by prestige of institution. As expected, the CPP for top

institutions is higher than that of lower-ranked institutions, regardless of the length of citation

window. This result is consistent with what previous studies found (e.g., Amara et al. 2015; Mou

et al. 2018).

Figure 8. A) 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) and B) 5-year cumulative citations per

paper (CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR) and papers without

foreign language references (PNLR), by type of institutions



Furthermore, Figure 8 demonstrates that, regardless of institution type, the CPP of PFLR is

greater than that of PNLR for both citation windows. This shows that papers with foreign

language references, regardless of the prestige of authors’ institutions, receive more citations than

those without. In order to further quantify the advantage of PFLR in average citation count, the

citation advantages are calculated. The CA2 of top institutions is 2.03 and the CA2 of other



institution is also 2.30. The CA5 of top institutions is 2.55, while that of other institutions is 2.81.

These values show that the average citation count of PFLR is about twice that of PNLR, and the

degree of PFLR’s advantage is not significantly different between two kinds of institutions. Taking

“With or without foreign language references” as the grouping variable, Mann-Whitney U test is

separately performed on the citation counts (C2 and C5) of papers published by top institutions

and other institutions (Table 8). It shows that, regardless of the prestige of the institution, there is a

significant difference between the citation count of PFLR and PNLR (p<0.001).

Table 8 Difference of citation count (C2 and C5) between papers with foreign language references

(PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR) in top and other institutions,

compared using a Mann-Whitney U test a

Top institutions



Other institutions

C2

C5



C2

C5

Mann-Whitney U

1.114E+10 9.860E+09  3.122E+10 2.750E+10

Wilcoxon W

2.342E+10 2.214E+10

1.354E+11

1.317E+11

Z

-99.021

-140.436

-143.659

-195.457

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

a. Grouping Variable: With or without foreign language references



From the above, it is shown that the citation advantage of papers with foreign language


## references still exists after testing for the prestige of institution.


3.3.4 Scientific collaboration

The proportion of papers with foreign language references (%PFLR) of co-authorship is

49.4%, while that of single authorship is 26.6%. Compared to sole-authored papers, there are more

co-authored papers citing foreign language literature. The 2-year cumulative citations per paper

(CPP2) and the 5-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP5) of total papers, papers with foreign

language references (PFLR), and papers without foreign language references (PNLR) written by

collaboratively and singly are shown in Figure 9. Reinforcing several studies (e.g., Larivière et al.

2015), we show that the CPP in papers written by multi-authors are greater than those by sole

author in both 2-year and 5-year windows, indicating that co-authored papers receive more

citations than those written by sole authors.



Figure 9. A) 2-year cumulative citations per paper (CPP2) and B) 5-year cumulative citations per

paper (CPP5) for all papers, papers with foreign language references (PFLR) and papers without

foreign language references (PNLR), by type of authorship



Despite these differences, the CPP of PFLR are always greater than those of PNLR,

regardless of the authorship type. The CA2 of co-authorship is 2.21 and that of single authorship is

2.30. The CA5 of co-authorship is 2.80 and that of single authorship is 2.75. The values of citation

advantage are quite similar between two kinds of authorship, and the PFLR receive more than

twice citations as PNLR. Taking “With or without foreign language references” as the grouping

variable, the Mann-Whitney U test is separately performed on the C2 and C5 of papers written by

co-authors and sole author, the results are shown in Table 9. It can be found that there is a

significant difference between the citation count of papers with foreign language references and

those without regardless of the authorship (p<0.001).

Table 9 Difference of citation count (C2 and C5) between papers with foreign language references

(PFLR) and papers without foreign language references (PNLR) in co-authored and

single-authored papers, compared using a Mann-Whitney U test a

Co-authorship



Single authorship

C2

C5



C2

C5

Mann-Whitney U

1.403E+10 1.226E+10  2.709E+10 2.408E+10

Wilcoxon W

3.169E+10 2.992E+10

1.175E+11

1.145E+11

Z

-117.106

-163.983

-135.18

-181.57

Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed)

.000

.000

.000

.000

a. Grouping Variable: With or without foreign language references



In conclusion, after testing for scientific collaboration, papers with foreign language


## references still receive more citations than those without.


3.3.5 Regression analysis

Various factors analyzed above were also combined in a multiple liner regression analysis to



investigate their relationship to citations. Table 10 shows that the regression model is statistically

significant (F(16, 950285)= 9320.659, p<0.001) and approximately 13.6% of variance in citations

can be explained by with or without foreign language references, discipline, prestige of journal,

prestige of institution, and scientific collaboration (R2=0.136). It is obvious that the

widely-recognized characteristics still have significant influence on citations in this regression,

specifically, there are significant differences in the number of citations received by papers in

different disciplines (p<0.001), papers published in leading journals receive more citations than

those published in other journals (β=0.144, p<0.001), papers from top institutions have more

citations than those from other institutions (β=0.097, p<0.001), and papers written by co-authors

receive more citations than those written by sole author (β=0.085, p<0.001). The most important

finding in this regression is that after controlling all of above characteristics, paper with foreign

language references (PFLR) still have more citations than papers without foreign language


## references (PNLR) (β=0.229, p<0.001). In addition, the β of PFLR is the largest among all


variables, which suggests that compared with the difference in discipline, in prestige of journal

and institution, as well as in scientific collaboration, citing foreign language literature has a

stronger influence on a paper’s citations.

To answer to RQ3, it is clear that the citation advantage of papers with foreign language


## references remains after controlling the widely-recognized characteristics of citing papers.


Table 10 Result of the multiple liner regression analysis

Independent Variable

Standardized Coefficients (β)

With or without foreign language references

PFLR

.229***

Discipline

Econ

.057***

Ed

-.007***

Evs

-.027***

Geo

.008***

Law

.026***

Lis

.093***

Mgmt

.025***

Pols

-.041***

Psy

.004***

Soc

.042***

Sps

.021***

Stat

.006***

Prestige of journal

LeadingJournal

.144***

Prestige of institution

TopInstitution

.097***

Scientific collaboration

Coauthorship

.085***

R2=.136      F(16, 950285)= 9320.659      Sig.=.000

*** p<0.001, N=950,302




## 4. Discussion and Conclusion


Scientometricians have long relied on a few citation databases to inform their understanding

of the progress of science. However, these databases have widely observed biases in favor of

English-speaking publications and journals from western countries. The present research provides

a novel contribution by taking a database focused on Chinese authors and publications. This

nationally-oriented database provides a rare analysis of the consumption of foreign literature and

the impact of the resulting work on the domestic research community.

We demonstrate a stark increase in the consumption of foreign language material within the

Chinese social science community: in 1998, only 11.7% of papers cited foreign language literature;

this number increased to more than half in 2013. Of all the foreign language references, English

accounts for the vast majority (96.4%). Citations are often noted for their symbolic function, but

they also serve a strong instrumental function in signaling to readers’ works with which they may

be unaware (Merton, 1988). This is particularly the case for foreign-language material: citing

relevant work may serve to bridge scientific communities across countries. In this case, they

become a window for domestic scholars to understand the work of international peers and thus

play a key media role in the diffusion of knowledge from the international to the local.

There is a significant citation advantage for papers that play this role: those papers

incorporating foreign language literature receive significantly more citations than those that do not.

The citation advantage of internationalized work holds when controlling for characteristics of the

citing papers, such as the discipline, prestige of journal, prestige of institution, and scientific

collaboration. Given that the citations are calculated internally—that is, citations coming from the

Chinese social science community—this suggests a higher scientific impact of papers that are

absorbing foreign literature. Therefore, limiting access to foreign language material within China

will have significant implications in the production of high-impact work.

As we observed, the citation advantage has decreased from 1998 to 2008, largely as an

artifact of the increased number of papers citing foreign language material. This may demonstrate

the homogenizing effect of globalization: as papers draw upon the same sources of knowledge, the

disparities in impact will lessen. However, this move towards globalization can also raise several

issues, particularly when it is oriented towards a single language. Adopting a lingua franca in

science can allow for easier communication across cultures, but it can also have a chilling effect

on local research topics which are not valued by the cultures of the dominant language. However,

we can also observe that after 2008, although the proportion of papers with foreign language


## references continued to increase, the citation advantage no longer declines and is now relatively


stable. This result suggests that incorporating foreign language literature continues to increase

scientific impact, even as the scientific community itself becomes increasingly international. It is

important to note that innovation does not only occur in a single language. For example, papers

that earned their authors a Nobel Prize have been written in 25 different languages over the last

century (1901-2017) (Nobelprize.org 2018). Only a quarter of the prize-winning papers were in

English, the lingua franca of science for most of that period (Gordin 2015). Therefore, it is critical

to remain mindful of the diversity of languages that can allow for the broadest diversity of

investigation in science.




## Acknowledgments


This research was financially supported by the National Social Science Fund of China (No.

17BTQ014) and the China Scholarship Council. We’d like to thank Fansai Meng for collecting


## data and Yi Bu as well as Jing Yang for fruitful discussions and comments. We also appreciate two


anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions.


## References


Aksnes, D. W. (2003). Characteristics of highly cited papers. Research Evaluation, 12(3),

159-170.

Amara, N., Landry, R., & Halilem, N. (2015). What can university administrators do to increase

the publication and citation scores of their faculty members?. Scientometrics, 103(2),

489-530.

Antoniou, G. A., Antoniou, S. A., Georgakarakos, E. I., Sfyroeras, G. S., & Georgiadis, G. S.

(2015). Bibliometric analysis of factors predicting increased citations in the vascular and

endovascular literature. Annals of Vascular Surgery, 29(2), 286-292.

Biscaro, C., & Giupponi, C. (2014). Co-authorship and bibliographic coupling network effects on

citations. PLoS One, 9(6), e99502. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0099502

Borgman, C. L., & Furner, J. (2002). Scholarly communication and bibliometrics. Annual Review

of Information Science and Technology, 36(1), 2-72.

Bornmann, L. (2016). Scientific revolution in scientometrics: The broadening of impact from

citation to societal. In C. R. Sugimoto (Ed.), Theories of informetrics and scholarly

communication (pp. 347-359). Berlin: De Gruyter.

Bornmann, L., & Daniel, H. D. (2008). What do citation counts measure? A review of studies on

citing behavior. Journal of Documentation, 64(1), 45-80.

Bornmann, L., Leydesdorff, L., & Wang, J. (2014). How to improve the prediction based on

citation impact percentiles for years shortly after the publication date?. Journal of

Informetrics, 8(1), 175-180.

Bornmann, L., Schier, H., Marx, W., & Daniel, H. D. (2012). What factors determine citation

counts of publications in chemistry besides their quality?. Journal of Informetrics, 6(1),

11-18.

Callaham, M., Wears, R. L., & Weber, E. (2002). Journal prestige, publication bias, and other

characteristics associated with citation of published studies in peer-reviewed journals.

Journal of the American Medical Association, 287(21), 2847-2850.

Chakraborty, T., Kumar, S., Goyal, P., Ganguly, N., & Mukherjee, A. (2014). Towards a stratified

learning approach to predict future citation counts. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM/IEEE-CS

Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, Sept. 8-12, 2014 (pp. 351-360). London, UK.

Chen, C. (2012). Predictive effects of structural variation on citation counts. Journal of the

American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(3), 431–449.



Chen, Y. (2016). The current status, problems and countermeasures of grading evaluation of

academic journals of humanities and social sciences in china. Library Science Research &

Work, (5), 5-13. (in Chinese).

Cheng, N. (2009). Research on knowledge transfer based on citation. (Doctoral dissertation,

Wuhan University). (in Chinese).

Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning

and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128-152.

Didegah, F., & Thelwall, M. (2013). Determinants of research citation impact in nanoscience and

nanotechnology. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,

64(5), 1055–1064.

Dorta-González, P. & Dorta-González, M. I. (2013). Comparing journals from different fields of

science and social science through a JCR subject categories normalized impact factor.

Scientometrics, 95(2), 645-672.

Du, M. (2019). About Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. http://casseng.cssn.cn/about/abo

ut_cass/. Accessed 3 Mar 2019.

Falagas, M. E., Zarkali, A., Karageorgopoulos, D. E., Bardakas, V., & Mavros, M. N. (2013). The

impact of article length on the number of future citations: A bibliometric analysis of general

medicine journals. PLoS One, 8(2), e49476. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0049476

Gargouri, Y., Hajjem, C., Lariviere, V., Gingras, Y., Carr, L., Brody, T., & Harnad, S. (2010).

Self-selected or mandated, open access increases citation impact for higher quality research.

PLoS One, 5(10), e13636. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0013636

Gingras, Y., & Mosbah-Natanson, S. (2010). Les sciences sociales françaises entre ancrage local

et visibilité internationale. European Journal of Sociology/Archives européennes de

sociologie, 51(2), 305-321.

Gordin, M. D. (2015). Scientific Babel: How science was done before and after global English.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gong, K., Xie, J., Cheng, Y., & Meng, F. (2018). Internationalization of references in journal

papers: An empirical study on library and information science. Journal of the China Society

for Scientific and Technical Information, 37(2), 151-160. (in Chinese).

Haslam, N., & Koval, P. (2010). Predicting long-term citation impact of articles in social and

personality psychology. Psychological Reports, 106(3), 891–900.

He, X. (2008) An analysis of the internationalization of academic research in humanities and

social sciences in China since the founding of PRC: based on the quantitative analysis of

SSCI and A&HCI (1956-2006). Dongyue Tribune, 29(3), 24-31. (in Chinese).

Institute for Chinese Social Science Research and Assessment of Nanjing University.(2016).


## Introduction of Chinese Social Sciences Citation Index (CSSCI). http://cssrac.nju.edu.c


n/a/cpzx/zwshkxwsy/sjkjj/20160226/1141.html. Accessed 21 Feb 2019.

Kulczycki, E., Engels, T. C., & Nowotniak, R. (2017). Publication patterns in the social sciences

and humanities in Flanders and Poland. In Proceedings of the16th International Conference

of the International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics, Oct. 16-20, 2017 (pp.

95-104). Wuhan, China.

Larivière, V. (2018). Le français, langue seconde ? De l'évolution des lieux et langues de

publication des chercheurs au Québec, en France et en Allemagne. Recherches

Sociographiques, 59(3), 339-363.



Larivière, V., Gong, K., Sugimoto, C. R. (2019). Citations strength begins at home. Nature, 564

(7735), S70-S71.

Larivière, V., Gingras, Y., Sugimoto, C. R., & Tsou, A. (2015). Team size matters: Collaboration

and scientific impact since 1900. Journal of the Association for Information Science and

Technology, 66(7), 1323-1332.

Liu, W. (2017). The changing role of non-English papers in scholarly communication: Evidence

from web of science's three journal citation indexes. Learned Publishing, 30(2), 115-123.

Liu, W., Hu, G., Tang, L., & Wang, Y. (2015). China's global growth in social science research:

Uncovering evidence from bibliometric analyses of SSCI publications (1978–2013). Journal

of Informetrics, 9(3), 555-569.

Lokker, C., McKibbon, K. A., McKinlay, R. J., Wilczynski, N. L., & Haynes, R. B. (2008).

Prediction of citation counts for clinical articles at two years using data available within three

weeks of publication: Retrospective cohort study. BMJ, 336(7645), 655–657.

Merton, R. K. (1988). The Matthew effect in science, ii: cumulative advantage and the symbolism

of intellectual property. ISIS, 79(4), 606-623.

Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. (2006). List of universities in “project

985”. http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A22/s7065/200612/t20061206_128833.html. Accessed

3 Mar 2019.

Miranda, R., & Garcia-Carpintero, E. (2018). Overcitation and overrepresentation of review

papers in the most cited papers. Journal of Informetrics, 12(4), 1015-1030.

Montgomery, S. L. (2013). Does science need a global language?: English and the future of

research. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mou, X., Gong, K., Xie, J., Cheng, Y., & Ke, Q. (2018). Contributing factors of citations: an

empirical study of library and information science in China. Documentation, Information and

Knowledge, (4), 43-52. (in Chinese).

Nature Index (2018). Institution outputs. https://www.natureindex.com/institution-outputs/gene

rate/All/global/All/score. Accessed 3 Mar 2019.

Nieminen, P., Carpenter, J., Rucker, G., & Schumacher, M. (2006). The relationship between

quality of research and citation frequency. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 6, 42.

https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-6-42

National Science Foundation (2018). Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. Chapter 5.

https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report/sections/academic-research-and-develop

ment/outputs-of-s-e-research-publications#publication-output-by-u-s-sector. Accessed 20 Feb

2019.

NobelPrize.org. (2018). Facts on the Nobel Prize in Literature. https://www.nobelprize.org/p

rizes/facts/facts-on-the-nobel-prize-in-literature/. Accessed 3 Mar 2019.

Office of Humanities and Social Sciences of Nanjing University. (2017). Catalogue of Leading

Journals in Humanities and Social Sciences. http://skch.nju.edu.cn/regulation. Accessed 3

Mar 2019.

Onodera, N., & Yoshikane, F. (2015). Factors affecting citation rates of research articles. Journal

of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66(4), 739–764.

Qiu, J., Zhao, R., & Dong, K. (2016). Scientometrics. Beijing: Science Press. (in Chinese).

Roth, C., Wu, J., & Lozano, S. (2012). Assessing impact and quality from local dynamics of

citation networks. Journal of Informetrics, 6(1), 111–120.



So, M., Kim, J., Choi, S., & Park, H. W. (2015). Factors affecting citation networks in science and

technology: Focused on non-quality factors. Quality and Quantity, 49(4), 1513–1530.

Su, X., Deng, S., & Shen, S. (2014). The design and application value of the Chinese social

science citation index. Scientometrics, 98(3), 1567-1582.

Sugimoto, C. R., & Larivière, V. (2018). Measuring research: What everyone needs to know.

Oxford: Oxford University Press

Sugimoto, C. R., Robinson-Garcia, N., Murray, D. S., Yegros-Yegros, A., Costas, R., & Larivière,

V. (2017). Scientists have most impact when they're free to move. Nature,550(7674), 29-31.

Tahamtan, I., Afshar, A. S., & Ahamdzadeh, K. (2016). Factors affecting number of citations: a

comprehensive review of the literature. Scientometrics, 107(3), 1195-1225.

Thelwall, M. (2016). Are the discretised lognormal and hooked power law distributions plausible

for citation data?. Journal of Informetrics, 10(2), 454-470.

Thelwall, M., & Wilson, P. (2014). Regression for citation data: an evaluation of different


## methods. Journal of Informetrics, 8(4), 963-971.


van Wesel, M., Wyatt, S., & ten Haaf, J. (2014). What a difference a colon makes: How

superficial factors influence subsequent citation. Scientometrics, 98(3), 1601–1615.

Wang, B., Bu, Y., & Xu, Y. (2018). A quantitative exploration on reasons for citing papers from

the perspective of cited authors. Scientometrics, 116(2), 675-687.

Wang, H., Deng, S., & Su, X. (2016). A study on construction and analysis of discipline

knowledge structure of Chinese LIS based on CSSCI. Scientometrics, 109(3), 1725–1759.

Warren, J. P. (2014). The end of national sociological traditions? The fates of sociology in English

Canada and French Quebec in a globalized field of science. International Journal of

Canadian Studies, 50, 87-108.

Xie, J., Cheng, Y., Sun, J., & Ke, Q. (2018). A study on citing behavior based on the theory of

information use environment: A cited references analysis. Journal of Library Science in

China, 44(5), 59-75. (in Chinese).

Yang, X., Gu, X., Wang, Y., Hu, G., & Tang, L. (2015). The Matthew effect in china’s science:

evidence from academicians of Chinese academy of sciences. Scientometrics, 102(3),

2089-2105.

Yitzhaki, M. (1998). The ‘language preference’ in sociology: measures of ‘language self-citation’,

‘relative own-language preference indicator’, and ‘mutual use of languages’. Scientometrics,

41(1-2), 243-254.

Yu, T., & Yu, G. (2014). Features of scientific papers and the relationships with their citation

impact. Malaysian Journal of Library and Information Science, 19(1), 37–50.

Yu, T., Yu, G., Li, P. Y., & Wang, L. (2014). Citation impact prediction for scientific papers using

stepwise regression analysis. Scientometrics, 101(2), 1233–1252.

Zhou, P., Thijs, B., & Glänzel, W. (2009). Is China also becoming a giant in social sciences?.

Scientometrics, 79(3), 593-621.

Zong, X., & Zhang, W. (2017). Establishing world-class universities in china: deploying a

quasi-experimental design to evaluate the net effects of project 985. Studies in Higher

Education, 44(3), 417-431.