On predicting research grants productivity

Jorge A. V. Tohalino and Diego R. Amancio∗

Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, Department of Computer Science,

University of S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil

(Dated: June 22, 2021)


## Abstract


arXiv:2106.10700v1  [cs.DL]  20 Jun 2021

Understanding the reasons associated with successful proposals are of paramount importance to

improve evaluation processes. In this context, we analyzed whether bibliometric features are able

to predict the success of research grants. We extracted features aiming at characterizing the aca-

demic history of Brazilian researchers, including research topics, aﬃliations, number of publications

and visibility. The extracted features were then used to predict grants productivity via machine

learning in three major research areas, namely Medicine, Dentistry and Veterinary Medicine. We

found that research subject and publication history play a role in predicting productivity. In ad-

dition, institution-based features turned out to be relevant when combined with other features.

While the best results outperformed text-based attributes, the evaluated features were not highly

discriminative. Our ﬁndings indicate that predicting grants success, at least with the considered

set of bibliometric features, is not a trivial task.

∗diego@icmc.usp.br

1



I.


## INTRODUCTION


In recent years, Science of Science emerged as an important application of big data anal-

ysis (Fortunato et al. 2018). Owing to the availability of large data sets derived from the

scientiﬁc literature, several studies have been conducted to shed light on how science is or-

ganized and evolves as a complex system (Zeng et al. 2017). Examples of approached topics

include science evolution (Silva et al. 2016), collaboration/citation patterns and measures

to evaluate science (Bar-Ilan 2008). More recently, studies in Science of Science have also

focused on predictive tasks, which has become very important in diﬀerent scenarios (Acuna

et al. 2012). For example, automatic approaches have been used to predict when a new topic

will emerge (Salatino et al. 2017). In a similar fashion, neural networks representations have

been able to predict outcomes of scientiﬁc research (Bagrow et al. 2018). Mobility trajec-

tories of researchers have also been studied using computational methods (He et al. 2019).

Equally important are those studies predicting scientiﬁc success, including the prediction of

papers and scholars’ impact (Wang et al. 2019).

More recently, several studies have focused on analyzing the factors underlying grants

success (Boyack et al. 2018, Letchford et al. 2016, Paiva et al. 2012, Tohalino et al. 2021).

Understanding the factors that may lead to successful grants are ultimately important to de-

termine which proposals are the most promising and relevant to be funded. While machine-

based techniques are not meant to replace an expert, thorough analysis of proposals, they

may assist the analysis of a large number of documents and other metadata extracted from

research proposals. Potential advantages associated with the use of machine learning meth-

ods to assist the analysis of proposals include an analysis less prone to personal bias, and

a much faster review compared to traditional human evaluations. In addition, automatic

analyses could also be used to understand the factors correlated to successful grants.

Text- and reference-based features have been used to predict the success of research

proposals (Boyack et al. 2018, Letchford et al. 2016, Paiva et al. 2012, Tohalino et al. 2021).

Boyack et al. (2018) found that proposals success depends on the topic being approached.

More speciﬁcally, Boyack et al. (2018) found that subjects that have already been studied

by the researcher are more likely to yield successful grants. The topic similarity in this case

was computed by comparing proposal references and the respective applicant publications.

A text analysis was conducted by Markowitz (2019). The authors studied if text complexity

2



measurements extracted from NSF projects correlate with the amount of funding received

by the researchers. They found that larger abstracts comprising a low number of common

words are among the main patterns associated with larger funding values.

In a similar

study, Tohalino et al. (2021) found that topical and complexity textual features play a role

in grants predicting grants productivity, but the prediction values were not very high.

Diﬀerent from other approaches, here we use machine-learning methods applied to fea-

tures extracted from researchers, institutions and publications to analyze whether those

features can be used to predict the productivity of grants. We used several features such

as total number of publications, citations, relevance of PI’s institution and diversity of the

approached subjects. Given the unbalanced nature of the dataset, we considered as criteria

for productivity the publication of at least one scientiﬁc paper (Tohalino et al. 2021). Using

a dataset of research grants from the S˜ao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP-Brazil), our


## analysis was conducted in three distinct research areas, namely Medicine, Dentistry and


Veterinary Medicine.

Several interesting results have been found from our analysis. The analysis based on

classiﬁers with a single feature showed that there is a relationship between the studied

features and future productivity of grants. In this single-feature analysis, features based

on research subjects and on publication/citation counts were the most eﬀective to predict

grants productivity. The analysis combining diﬀerent features in the same classiﬁer also

showed an improvement in performance. The highest accuracy rates were found for the

Veterinary Medicine area. In this case, we could discriminate productive grants with an

accuracy higher than 67%. While the results are signiﬁcant, the typical prediction accuracy

were not very high. They were typically higher, though, than approaches based on textual

features alone (Tohalino et al. 2021). Our analysis also revealed that both Support Vector

Machines and Multilayer Perceptron were the classiﬁers yielding the highest accuracy rates.

Despite being a challenging task, we believe that the studied features could be combined

with additional information to allow a better understanding of the factors correlated with

grants success.

This manuscript is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the methodology,

including the description of features and the machine learning framework. We discuss the

obtained results in Section III. Finally, in Section IV, we present the conclusions and per-

spectives for future works.

3



II.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

In order to classify research grants according to their productivity, the following steps

were taken:


## 1. Dataset collection: the dataset we used comprises research projects supported by


S˜ao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP-Brazil). The dataset is available from the

Biblioteca Virtual website (see Section II A). In addition to the information regarding

research projects (number of papers derived from the grant, title, abstract etc), the


## dataset also provides information to characterize PIs (e.g their publication history)


and institutions (e.g. universities and research institutes).


## 2. Feature extraction: this step is responsible for extracting features from researchers


that are used to predict grants productivity. Our hypothesis is that the success of a

grant could be dependent on PIs features, such as previous success in other grants and

publication/citation history. Several features were extracted to characterize authors.

Examples of extracted features are: number of funded projects, number of publications

and citations yielded by the researcher’s grants, aﬃliation and diversity of subﬁelds

studied by the researcher. Section II B describes the features we used to perform the

classiﬁcation.


## 3. Classiﬁcation: the aim of this phase is automatically identify productive research


proposal according to the established criteria for productivity. We considered a binary

classiﬁcation task. The features extracted from the previous step were used as input

for traditional machine learning algorithms. We also performed several tests in order

to ﬁnd the best combination of features. In Section II C, we describe the classiﬁcation

step. This phase includes the training and evaluation phase.

In Figure 1, the architecture for research grant classiﬁcation is shown. First, we collected

relevant information from the FAPESP Dataset (FAPESP Virtual Library). This includes

information from PIs that are related to their previous research experience and other features

linked to their professional activity. All information from researchers are collected in the

researcher dataset. Examples of features extracted are the number of publications obtained

in previous grants (pubFeat), number of citations received by these publications (pubCitFeat)

4



and other features that are detailed later on. These features are used to train supervised

classiﬁers in a binary classiﬁcation task to predict whether a grant will be productive. We use

the number of publications resulting from the grant as the criterion to measure productivity.

FIG. 1: Architecture of the proposed methodology for research grant classiﬁcation.

A.


## Dataset collection


The considered dataset comprises a subset of grants oﬀered by S˜ao Paulo Research Foun-

dation (FAPESP) (Tohalino et al. 2021). FAPESP is an important public research founda-

tion in Brazil and is fully funded by the State of S˜ao Paulo Note1. The metadata regarding

PIs and research grants were retrieved from Biblioteca Virtual website Note2. We focused

our analysis on regular grants, which are grants with an average duration of 18-24 months.

All FAPESP regular grants are conducted under the supervision of a principal investigator,

who must be associated with a university (or research institution) from S˜ao Paulo. We

decided to study this type of grant because the Biblioteca Virtual has a large number of reg-

ular grants (roughly 31,000 instances). We selected research grants starting before 2016 with

duration between 23 and 24 months. Because recent grants were disregarded, all considered

projects had at least 3 years to yield at least one publication after the grant is ﬁnished.

5



Each research grant has a list of associated publications. This information is to auto-

matically extracted from the Web of Science (Clarivate Analytics) dataset by the Biblioteca

Virtual website. This automatic extraction is possible because any paper published in the

context of a FAPESP research grant must acknowledge FAPESP in a speciﬁc format. Reg-

ular grants particularly are acknowledged using the format “yyyy/nnnnn-d”, where “yyyy”

represents the year when the research project was submitted and “nnnnn-d” is the grant

number.

Grants funded by FAPESP cover a wide variety of research areas, including, e.g. Health,

Biological and Earth Sciences.

Because distinct areas have diﬀerent publication pat-

terns (Rafols and Meyer 2010), we decided to compare grants within the same ﬁeld. Our


## analysis was conducted in the three largest ﬁelds: Medicine (MED), Dentistry (DENT) and


Veterinary Medicine (VET).

B.

Feature extraction

For each research grant, we extracted several features related to the respective PI. The

features are meant to characterize researchers’ academic trajectory just before the grant

started. The features used to characterize PIs were grouped into the following groups:


## 1. Publication-based features (pubFeat): here we use features that are related to PIs


publications.

Our hypothesis here is that a good previous performance related to

publications could be a good indicator of future performance (Lu et al. 2019). The

following publication-based features were used for this analysis:

(a) total number of publications;

(b) number of grants yielding at least one publication;

(c) maximum number of publications resulting from a single grant received by the

PI;

(d) average productivity (in number of publications); and

(e) number of grants at least one publication divided by the total number of grants

received by the PI.

6




## 2. Features based on both publications and citations (pubCitFeat): While scientiﬁc pub-


lications denote researchers eﬀort to provide new pieces of knowledge, citations can

be considered as a metric of relevance and visibility (Kong et al. 2020, Siudem et al.

2020). Our hypothesis is that citations can be used as a proxy to PIs scientiﬁc inﬂu-

ence (Ioannidis et al. 2020). Thus, we investigate whether inﬂuential researchers are

more likely to conduct productive research grants. The following PIs measurements

were considered for this set of features:

(a) total number of articles published;

(b) total number of citations accrued by the researcher;

(c) average number of publications per year; and

(d) average number of citations per year.


## 3. Features based on the number of grants and scholarships received by the PI (grntFeat):


our hypothesis is that more experienced researchers are more likely to have a pro-

ductive grant (Larrimore et al. 2011, Markowitz 2019). The degree of researcher’s

experience was measured in terms of the total number of grants and scholarships re-

ceived by the researcher. In addition to regular grants, we also considered as features

the number of undergraduate, master’s, doctoral and post-doctoral degree scholarships

supervised by the researcher.


## 4. Features based on the diversity of research areas (areaFeat): our hypothesis here is


that PIs might have experience on diverse research areas, and this could be an indi-

cation of future productivity. Some studies have shown that interdisciplinary journals

and papers are more visible in the sense that they tend to attract more citations than

more specialized research (Rinia et al. 2002). In a similar fashion, our hypothesis

is that interdisciplinary research could be more visible and this could facilitate the

publication of papers since more journals and scholars could be interested in the in-

terdisciplinary results being disseminated. The features used to quantify the degree

of interdisciplinary encompasses three diﬀerent granularity levels. We considered the

number of areas in each of the ﬁrst three levels. Examples of top-levels areas include

Exact and Health Sciences. Examples of second-level hierarchy areas for Health Sci-

ences include e.g. Nursing, Pharmacy, Medicine and Dentistry. Finally, examples of

7



third level areas for Medicine include Medical Clinic, Maternal Health, Surgery and

Psychiatry.


## 5. Collaboration-based features (collabFeat): in this set of features we evaluate whether


the number of diﬀerent collaborators in the past might be correlated with grants

success. A large number of collaborators could be a proxy to quantify researchers’

experience (or even seniority) and thus collaboration-based features could indicate if

an author is able to gather researchers with diﬀerent backgrounds to conduct scientiﬁc

research.

Because more collaborations could be also correlated with more distinct

contributions (Corrˆea Jr et al. 2017), we could also expect that joint eﬀort could be

correlated with higher quality research (Franceschet and Costantini 2010), which in

turn could positively contribute to the success of a research grant.

The following

features were used to quantify the diversity of PIs collaborations:

(a) total number of local collaborators in research grants. Local researchers are all

researchers aﬃliated to a Brazilian research (or higher-education) institutions;

(b) total number of abroad collaborators;

(c) total number of grants received by the PI with one or more associated researchers;

(d) total number of distinct co-authors in scientiﬁc publications; and

(e) average number of co-authors per article.


## 6. Institution-based features (instFeat):


institution-based features are used to probe

whether PIs aﬃliation plays a role in predicting the success of research grants. The

hypothesis is that grants conducted at larger (or more visible) institutions are more

likely to yield a productive grant. More prestigious institutions could favour produc-

tivity given that more prestigious institutions could themselves host more productive

researchers (Bauder 2020). In addition, more prestigious universities could also have

more access to the material and resources to conduct high-quality research. The visi-

bility and importance of institutes were measured in terms of the following features:

(a) total number of projects hosted by the PI’s institution;

(b) total number of publications associated with the PI’s institution; and

8



(c) total number of productive grants hosted by the PI’s. We used here the criteria

discussed in Section II A to classify a grant as productive.

The set of features mentioned in (a)-(c) are henceforth referred to as instFeatA. We also

considered an additional data representation, where we do not consider the features

extracted from the institution, but the host institution becomes a feature.

More

speciﬁcally, a vector is used to represent if the PI belongs to a speciﬁc institution. The

i-th element of the vector takes the value 1 if the PI is aﬃliated to the i-th institution.

Otherwise, the value stored is zero. This representation is henceforth referred to as

instFeatB.

We also used a diﬀerent representation referred to as instFeatC.

This

representation uses a vector that is similar to the previous version, but instead of

assigning the value 1, we assigned the value of the success rate of the researcher’s

university or institution.


## 7. Success of research subjects (subjFeat): each research project in the dataset comprises


keywords (or keyphrases) that help to describe the main topics approached by the

research. Our hypothesis here is that topics may play an important role in predicting

the productivity of grants, since particular research lines might have higher levels of

productivity (Tohalino et al. 2021).

In order to analyze whether productivity has

a dependency on the research subject, we considered two measurements taking into

account the success history of diﬀerent subjects. The global importance considers the

success of a subject in the whole dataset. Diﬀerently, the local importance considers

the success of subjects in grants conducted by the PI being analyzed. The success rate

of a subject X is computed as the number of productive grants approaching X divided

by the total number of grants associated with X. The criteria used to characterize

productivity is detailed in Section II A. Three diﬀerent sets of features were considered

to represent the success of research subjects:

(a) subjFeatA: each researcher was characterized using a vector summarizing the

local and global success of the approached subjects.

Because many subjects

might be related to a PI in previous projects, we summarized the success rate of

the approached subjects observed for keywords. In particular, we considered the

average, the standard deviation and the maximum success rate observed for the

9



keywords. Therefore, for each PI, six features were considered: both local and

global strategies were used to compute the success rate, and three summarization

strategies were applied.

(b) subjFeatB: we ﬁrst obtained the k-most frequent subjects of the researcher.

Then we calculated the global success rate and local success rate vectors for these

subjects. The generated vectors were considered feature vectors. We evaluated

with k ranging between 10 and 50 subjects.

(c) subjFeatC: This version is similar to subjFeatA, but instead of considering the

success rate, we considered the frequency count of the researcher’s subjects.

C.

Classiﬁcation

The main purpose of this study is to probe whether bibliometric information of researchers

(e.g. their publication history and participation in previous research grants) are relevant

factors to predict productivity of their research grants.

In order to address the problem

of class unbalancing in the classiﬁcation scheme (Li et al. 2010), we considered a grant as

productive if it yielded at least one publication. Thus, for each considered research ﬁeld, the

total number of positive (i.e. grants with at least one publication) and negative instances

are more regularly distributed. This is compatible with previous related research (Tohalino

et al. 2021). If a higher threshold was considered to label an instance as positive, only a

small percentage of grants would be considered as positive and this eﬀect would lead to a

high level of class unbalancing. The fraction of positive instances found for MED, DENT

and VET are 41.6%, 49.5% and 32.9%, respectively.

To analyze the relationship between the extracted features and grants productivity, we

used the following machine learning algorithms: k-Neatest Neighbors (kNN), Support Vector

Machines (SVM), Naive Bayes (NB), Neural Networks (MLP) and Decision Trees (DTrees).

The algorithms hyperparameters were optimized using the strategy described in (Amancio

et al. 2014, Rodriguez et al. 2019). The evaluation of the classiﬁcation was based on the

10-fold cross-validation method to split the dataset into training and test datasets (Duda

et al. 2012). A description of the used algorithms and the strategy used to balance the

classes are described in Appendix A.

10



III.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


In this section, we discuss the results we obtained when evaluating whether the considered

features can be used to predict the productivity of grants. We divided our analysis into the

following sections: In Section III A, we report the performance of diﬀerent features when

they are individually evaluated. In Section III B, we discuss the results we obtained when

researcher features are combined. The relevance of features for the classiﬁcation task is also

analyzed. In Section III C, we report the results obtained when combining several classiﬁers

via voting method.

A.

Performance analysis of single features

In this section, we discuss the results when each family of features is individually analyzed.

The obtained results for each of the considered research areas are shown in Figure 2. For

the Medicine area, we observed that the best result was found with subject-based features

(subjFeatB), meaning that the average success of the topic being approached plays a role

in predicting productivity. In the best scenario, the accuracy rate reached roughly 62%.

While this is not a very high accuracy rate, this result turned out to be signiﬁcant. We

also found that, for this research area, publication and citation history also play a role in

predicting productivity. Both previous productivity (pubFeat) and impact (pubCitFeat) have

a signiﬁcant role in predicting grants productivity. All other features were found to be not

statistically discriminative. Particularly, we found a very low discriminative performance

for a particular institution feature (instFeatA) that considers the total number of projects

hosted by the institution. Because this feature might be related to the size of the institution,

this result suggests that being in a larger university is not necessarily linked to a higher

productivity. Surprisingly we found that the diversity of areas can not be used as a source

of productivity. While interdisciplinary researchers usually attain better performance in

funding (Sun et al. 2021), we did not observe any signiﬁcant relationship between grants

interdisciplinarity and productivity.

When analyzing the results obtained for the Dentistry area, we also found similar results.

The productivity rate of the approached subject (subjFeatC) was found to be the most rel-

evant feature to identify productive Dentistry grants. In this case, the highest accuracy

11



FIG. 2: Results based on accuracy rate obtained from the evaluation of each researcher

feature. We considered projects from the following areas: Medicine, Dentistry and

Veterinary Medicine. From each researcher we considered seven features and their

variations.

12



rate reached 63.0%. We also found that publication and citation-based features also gen-

erated statistically signiﬁcant results. All other features were found to be not signiﬁcantly

correlated with productivity.

The highest accuracy rates were found for the Veterinary area. An accuracy of roughly

66% was obtained with the MLP and SVM methods. Once again we observe that the previ-

ous success of a topic is correlated with future success. In a similar fashion, publication and

citation-based features also displayed signiﬁcant accuracy rates. Diﬀerently from Medicine

and Dentistry, a statistically signiﬁcant relationship between collaboration features and pro-

ductivity has also been found. This means that the number of previous PI’s collaborators

could be an indicator of future grant productivity. A correlation was also found for two

institution-based features (instFeatB and instFeatC). While the total number of projects

hosted by the PI’s institution is not correlated with productivity, the fraction of productive

grants has a higher correlation rate. Similarly, the total number of publications associated

with the PI’s institution also seems to be correlated with productivity.

Concerning the methods, the performance varied according to the considered feature and


## dataset. When considering only the best results across all variations of features and methods,


we observed that the highest accuracy rate was found with SVM (Medicine and Veterinary

Medicine) and MLP (Dentistry). The best results are highlighted in the Supplementary

Information. However, the best results obtained for each method are very similar when

considering a single feature classiﬁcation. In general, the worst accuracy rates were obtained

with kNN and Naive Bayes.

B.

Performance analysis of feature combinations

While in the previous section we analyzed the discriminability of each feature when they

are used individually, here we analyze whether combinations of features can lead to optimized


## results. In addition to considering all features, we also considered other feature selection


algorithms to ﬁnd an optimized combination of attributes (Kou et al. 2020).

The ﬁrst

approach used to combine features considered random subgroups of features. We considered

feature sets of diﬀerent sizes and we used them as input for the classiﬁcation systems. In

Table I, we show the best accuracy rate found in each dataset, with diﬀerent classiﬁers.

We found that all best results were found to be statistically signiﬁcant, and the best result

13



being found for Veterinary Medicine (66.5%). As observed in the single feature analysis, the


## results are not highly discriminative. In addition, the results show that the combination of


features is not signiﬁcantly better than the results found with single features, showing that

no complementary information can be obtained with the selected machine learning methods.

Regarding the methods, we note that SVM outperformed all other classiﬁers in all datasets.

However, similar results were obtained with other classiﬁers, especially with Decision Trees.

TABLE I: Results based on accuracy rate obtained by performing feature combinations.

We show the results from the best combination of features for each research area

(Medicine, Dentistry and Veterinary Medicine). The best results for each research area are

highlighted. The SVM classiﬁer always achieved the highest scores for all cases.


## Method


Medicine

Dentistry

Vet. Medicine

Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%)

DTrees

61.96 ± 1.12

62.08 ± 0.90

65.46 ± 1.59

SVM

62.82 ± 0.67 62.50 ± 1.22 66.57 ± 1.57

kNN

59.29 ± 0.88

61.58 ± 0.91

64.27 ± 1.49

Bayes

60.34 ± 0.41

61.00 ± 0.37

64.06 ± 1.61

MLP

60.99 ± 0.61

60.28 ± 0.61

64.22 ± 0.82

In addition to the approach based on a random selection of features, we also used an

approach based on the Gini coeﬃcient (Nembrini et al. 2018). This approach is widely used

to ﬁnd relevant features in methods based on decision trees (Pedregosa et al. 2011) and

has also been used in the scientometrics context (Tohalino et al. 2021). Using the Gini

index, each feature was given a relevance value and then we selected the top k-features to

analyze the gain in discriminability, with k ranging between 10 and 100. Then, we used

the selected features along with the SVM algorithm in order to perform the classiﬁcation

process. We considered the SVM classiﬁer because it displayed the highest accuracy rates

with the selected features.

The results obtained with the Gini feature selection are displayed in Table II. Overall the


## results show that there is no signiﬁcant improvement in performance when one compares with


the results obtained with the results displayed in Table I. However, a small improvement

can be observed mainly for the Veterinary Medicine Area.

While this strategy was not

useful to improve signiﬁcantly the performance, this allowed an improved representation

since similar results were obtained with a much smaller set of features (10 features in the

case of Veterinary Medicine). We also note that that a large set of features – even when

14



selected via Gini method – does note necessarily improve the discriminability rate.

TABLE II: Results obtained from the evaluation of feature selection methods. We tested

with the most 10, 20, 50 and 100 relevant features. The best results for each research area

are highlighted. The accuracy rate was obtained with the SVM method, since this method

provided the best results.

k relevant features

Medicine

Dentistry

Vet. Medicine

Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%)

Top-10 features

59.94 ± 1.09

60.35 ± 1.18

67.35 ± 1.28

Top-20 features

60.24 ± 1.00

60.68 ± 0.52

67.37 ± 1.14

Top-50 features

61.99 ± 0.55

61.74 ± 1.15

66.98 ± 1.55

Top-100 features

62.58 ± 1.11 62.77 ± 0.46

65.77 ± 1.14

In addition to providing a compact representation, the feature selection algorithm allowed

us to investigate which features are the most important for the classiﬁcation task. This


## analysis is diﬀerent from the analysis performed in the previous section because diﬀerent


discriminability performance can be observed when features are combined (Amancio et al.

2011). According to the Gini coeﬃcient, the most relevant features for each ﬁeld are:

• Medicine: institution-based and subject-based features displayed the highest Gini

values. The success rate of the projects hosted by the PI’s institution was a relevant

feature in the family of features related to the institution (instFeatC). In a similar

fashion, the success history associated with the approached subject was an important

feature. This result suggests that, when used in combination with other features, the

success history of both institution and approached subject are relevant to predict the

output of research projects.

• Dentistry: instFeatC and subjFeatA were found to be the most relevant features. This


## result is similar to the one found for Medicine. The other variations related to subject-


based features were also relevant: both history of global and local success of approached

subjects were important for the task.

• Veterinary Medicine: here the most relevant feature was the history of the PI’s pub-

lications (pubFeat).

The other important variables were institution based features

and all features based on the relevant of subject features (subjFeatA, subjFeatB and

subjFeatC).

15



The vast majority of relevant features are based on subject features (subjFeat). Conse-

quently, these results conﬁrm the good performance obtained from the subject-based fea-

tures when they are only considered for the classiﬁcation systems (according to the results

shown in Section III A). We also observed that some variations of the features based on

the institution of the researcher (instFeat) have a degree of importance to characterize the

performance of a researcher. However, it is important to recall that these features performed

poorly when they were considered individually, while their performance improved when they

were evaluated together with other features in a combined approach. These results indicate

that institution-based could be an important factor, but individually they did not display a

discriminative power. It is also interesting to note that the publication can also play a role

in predicting success. This measurement turned out to be particularly important for the

Veterinary Medicine area, even when used as a single feature (see Figure 2).

C.

Performance analysis of ensembles: voting algorithm

In the previous section, we analyzed if the combination of diﬀerent features are able

to improve the discriminability rates. Here we combine diﬀerent classiﬁers to analyze if

evidence from multiple methods can lead to optimized results. For this we used a voting

algorithm (Kiziloz 2021).

Two strategies were considered: (i) the use of all considered

classiﬁers and (ii) the use of the best classiﬁers (see Material and Methods). According to

the results presented in the previous sections, the classiﬁcation systems that achieved the

highest accuracy rates were the SVM and MLP algorithms, while Naive Bayes and kNN

obtained the worst performance. We considered all the combinations of features described

in the previous sections.

We show in Table III the results obtained from these evaluations. The obtained results

revealed that the combination of classiﬁers did not improve the results obtained in previous

sections. In particular, using all classiﬁers is not useful given the low performance achieved

especially by Naive Bayes and kNN. The performance of SVM + MLP combination was also

not useful to improve the performance of the classiﬁcation.

In sum, in the considered dataset, we found that combining diﬀerent evidence from dif-

ferent features is more important than combining diﬀerent classiﬁers. While some classiﬁers

perform better than others, this result indicates that additional features could be used to

16



TABLE III: Accuracy rates obtained from the evaluation of voting algorithms. For each

research area we show the results of the following methods: All (when the results of all

proposed classiﬁers are combined into the voting system) and Best (when only SVM and

MLP are considered). The best results for each research area are highlighted.


## Method


Medicine

Dentistry

Vet. Medicine

Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%)

All

59.67 ± 0.62

57.88 ± 0.36

64.61 ± 1.36

Best

62.07 ± 0.89 62.50 ± 0.74 65.00 ± 0.80

improve the predictive power of the classiﬁers. The study conducted here showed that the

features we used are more relevant than features based on topical or complexity textual

features (Tohalino et al. 2021). However, additional text information could also be obtained

from project abstracts and complement the characterization of research projects in order

to improve the predictability of grants productivity. Additional text representations, in-

cluding those based on network science (Tohalino and Amancio 2018) could also be used to

characterize research grant texts.

IV.


## CONCLUSION


In this paper, we evaluated whether it is possible to predict the productivity of research

projects by considering many diﬀerent features to describe scientiﬁc entities.

Our analysis was conducted in three large subareas and considered grants awarded by

S˜ao Paulo Research Foundation, one of the largest research agencies in Brazil. We con-

sidered several features that could quantify the characteristics of research projects, PI’s

experience and the importance of host institutions. The relationship between the features

and productivity was analyzed in the context of a traditional classiﬁcation task.

Our analysis considered four diﬀerent approaches to combine features and classiﬁers.

First, we analyzed classiﬁers created with only a single feature. We then combined fea-

tures via feature selection and relevance analysis. We also combined classiﬁers in a voting

algorithm. Overall we found that the best results in all four considered approaches are sta-

tistically signiﬁcant, meaning that some of the features play a role in predicting the output

of research projects. The main results are summarized in Table IV. All best results were

found to be signiﬁcant, though none of them reached a 70% accuracy rate. The best results

in diﬀerent areas were obtained with distinct strategies. A single feature (the approached

17



subject) was able to provide the highest accuracy rate for the Dentistry area. The combina-

tion of features was able to provide the highest accuracy for Medicine. A feature selection

algorithm ﬁnally provided the best results for Veterinary Medicine. Our analysis also re-

vealed that the voting system combining evidence from multiple classiﬁers did not provide

any improvement in classiﬁcation performance.

TABLE IV: Summary of the best results for each proposed approach. We highlighted the

highest scores for each research area. The highest accuracy was found for the Veterinary

Medicine ﬁeld. Four diﬀerent approaches were considered: (i) classiﬁcation based on a

single feature; (b) random combination of features; (iii) classiﬁcation based on feature

selection; and (iv) combination of classiﬁers via voting strategy.


## Method


Medicine

Dentistry

Vet. Medicine

Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%)

Single feature

62.07 ± 0.70 63.00 ± 0.55

65.69 ± 1.24

Features combination 62.82 ± 0.67 62.50 ± 1.22

66.57 ± 1.57

Feature relevance

62.58 ± 1.11

62.77 ± 0.46

67.37 ± 1.14

Voting system

62.07 ± 0.89

62.50 ± 0.74

65.00 ± 0.80

While we found a dependency between the features and the output of projects, in all con-

sidered areas, the accuracy rates were not very high. This reinforces the fact that predicting

the output of grants is not a trivial task and one can not rely only on machine learning to

make predictions with high accuracy, at least with the considered features. The results found

in this study were slightly better than the ones found using only textual features (Tohalino

et al. 2021).

In future works, it would be interesting to analyze whether the use of wider contexts

could lead to improved results. In text analysis, the access to the full content of research

projects could provide more information than the title and abstract. A possible analysis

could be the extraction of textual patterns via network analysis (Amancio et al. 2012a, Mar-

inho et al. 2016, Stella et al. 2021). Unfortunately, full textual information is not currently

available in our dataset. Other extensions of this work could also be investigated. This in-

cludes other productivity and impact criteria, such as the total number of citations received

by a grant, the reputation of journals and conferences associated with grant publications

and other quality and impact criteria. We could also use collaborative network-based ap-

proaches (Amancio et al. 2012b, 2015, Corrˆea Jr et al. 2017) to analyze whether scientiﬁc

collaborations and team formation strategies may play a role in grants productivity.

18




## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This study was ﬁnanced in part by the Coordena¸c˜ao de Aperfei¸coamento de Pessoal de

N´ıvel Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001.

19



D. E. Acuna, S. Allesina, and K. P. Kording. Predicting scientiﬁc success. Nature, 489(7415):

201–202, 2012.

D. R. Amancio, E. G. Altmann, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. da Fontoura Costa. Comparing inter-

mittency and network measurements of words and their dependence on authorship. New Journal

of Physics, 13(12):123024, 2011.

D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa. Unveiling the relationship between complex

networks metrics and word senses. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 98(1):18002, 2012a.

D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa. On the use of topological features and hi-

erarchical characterization for disambiguating names in collaborative networks. EPL (Europhysics

Letters), 99(4):48002, 2012b.

D. R. Amancio, C. H. Comin, D. Casanova, G. Travieso, O. M. Bruno, F. A. Rodrigues, and

L. da Fontoura Costa. A systematic comparison of supervised classiﬁers. PloS one, 9(4):e94137,

2014.

D. R. Amancio, O. N. Oliveira Jr, and L. d. F. Costa. Topological-collaborative approach for

disambiguating authors’ names in collaborative networks. Scientometrics, 102(1):465–485, 2015.

J. P. Bagrow, D. Berenberg, and J. Bongard. Neural language representations predict outcomes of

scientiﬁc research. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06879, 2018.

J. Bar-Ilan. The h-index of h-index and of other informetric topics. Scientometrics, 75(3):591–605,

2008.

H. Bauder. International mobility and social capital in the academic ﬁeld. Minerva, pages 1–21,

2020.

K. W. Boyack, C. Smith, and R. Klavans. Toward predicting research proposal success. Sciento-

metrics, 114(2):449–461, 2018.

L. Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001.

E. A. Corrˆea Jr, F. N. Silva, L. d. F. Costa, and D. R. Amancio. Patterns of authors contribution

in scientiﬁc manuscripts. Journal of Informetrics, 11(2):498–510, 2017.

T. G. Dietterich. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In International workshop on multiple

classiﬁer systems, pages 1–15. Springer, 2000.

R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork. Pattern classiﬁcation. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

20



S. Fortunato, C. T. Bergstrom, K. B¨orner, J. A. Evans, D. Helbing, S. Milojevi´c, A. M. Petersen,

F. Radicchi, R. Sinatra, B. Uzzi, A. Vespignani, L. Waltman, D. Wang, and A.-L. Barab´asi.

Science of science. Science, 359(6379), 2018. ISSN 0036-8075. doi:10.1126/science.aao0185. URL

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/359/6379/eaao0185.

M. Franceschet and A. Costantini. The eﬀect of scholar collaboration on impact and quality of

academic papers. Journal of informetrics, 4(4):540–553, 2010.

S. O. Haykin. Neural Networks and Learning Machines. 3rd Edition. Prentice Hall, 3 edition,


## 2008. ISBN 0131471392,9780131471399. URL http://gen.lib.rus.ec/book/index.php?md5=


0239F16656E6E5E7DB7AAA160CF9F854.

Z. He, N. Zhen, and C. Wu. Measuring and exploring the geographic mobility of american professors

from graduating institutions: Diﬀerences across disciplines, academic ranks, and genders. Journal

of Informetrics, 13(3):771–784, 2019.

J. P. Ioannidis, K. W. Boyack, and J. Baas. Updated science-wide author databases of standardized

citation indicators. PLoS Biology, 18(10):e3000918, 2020.

H. E. Kiziloz. Classiﬁer ensemble methods in feature selection. Neurocomputing, 419:97–107, 2021.

X. Kong, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Bu, Y. Ding, and F. Xia. The gene of scientiﬁc success. ACM

Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 14(4):1–19, 2020.

G. Kou, P. Yang, Y. Peng, F. Xiao, Y. Chen, and F. E. Alsaadi. Evaluation of feature selection


## methods for text classiﬁcation with small datasets using multiple criteria decision-making methods.


Applied Soft Computing, 86:105836, 2020.

M. M. Kumbure, P. Luukka, and M. Collan. A new fuzzy k-nearest neighbor classiﬁer based on

the bonferroni mean. Pattern Recognition Letters, 140:172–178, 2020.

L. Larrimore, L. Jiang, J. Larrimore, D. Markowitz, and S. Gorski. Peer to peer lending: The

relationship between language features, trustworthiness, and persuasion success. Journal of Applied

Communication Research, 39(1):19–37, 2011.

A. Letchford, T. Preis, and H. S. Moat. The advantage of simple paper abstracts. Journal of

Informetrics, 10(1):1–8, 2016.

D.-C. Li, C.-W. Liu, and S. C. Hu. A learning method for the class imbalance problem with medical


## data sets. Computers in biology and medicine, 40(5):509–518, 2010.


C. Lu, Y. Bu, X. Dong, J. Wang, Y. Ding, V. Larivi`ere, C. R. Sugimoto, L. Paul, and C. Zhang.

Analyzing linguistic complexity and scientiﬁc impact. Journal of Informetrics, 13(3):817–829, 2019.

21



V. Q. Marinho, G. Hirst, and D. R. Amancio. Authorship attribution via network motifs identiﬁ-

cation. In 2016 5th Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems (BRACIS), pages 355–360. IEEE,

2016.

D. M. Markowitz. What words are worth: National science foundation grant abstracts indicate

award funding. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 38(3):264–282, 2019.

A. McCallum, K. Nigam, et al. A comparison of event models for naive bayes text classiﬁcation.

In AAAI-98 workshop on learning for text categorization, volume 752, pages 41–48. Citeseer, 1998.

S. Nembrini, I. R. K¨onig, and M. N. Wright. The revival of the gini importance? Bioinformatics,

34(21):3711–3718, 2018.

Note1. https://fapesp.br/en/about.

Note2. https://bv.fapesp.br/pt/.

C. E. Paiva, J. P. d. S. N. Lima, and B. S. R. Paiva. Articles with short titles describing the results

are cited more often. Clinics, 67(5):509–513, 2012.

F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pret-

tenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal of

machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.

I. Rafols and M. Meyer. Diversity and network coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity: case

studies in bionanoscience. Scientometrics, 82(2):263–287, 2010.

E. Rinia, T. van Leeuwen, and A. van Raan. Impact measures of interdisciplinary research in

physics. Scientometrics, 53(2):241–248, 2002.

M. Z. Rodriguez, C. H. Comin, D. Casanova, O. M. Bruno, D. R. Amancio, L. d. F. Costa, and

F. A. Rodrigues. Clustering algorithms: A comparative approach. PloS one, 14(1):e0210236, 2019.

D. Ruta and B. Gabrys. Classiﬁer selection for majority voting. Information fusion, 6(1):63–81,

2005.

A. A. Salatino, F. Osborne, and E. Motta. How are topics born? understanding the research

dynamics preceding the emergence of new areas. PeerJ Computer Science, 3:e119, 2017.

F. N. Silva, D. R. Amancio, M. Bardosova, L. d. F. Costa, and O. N. Oliveira Jr. Using network

science and text analytics to produce surveys in a scientiﬁc topic. Journal of Informetrics, 10(2):

487–502, 2016.

G. Siudem, B. ˙Zoga la-Siudem, A. Cena, and M. Gagolewski. Three dimensions of scientiﬁc impact.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020.

22



M. Stella, T. Swanson, T. T. Hills, and A. S. Teixeira. Cognitive network science as a framework

for detecting structural patterns and emotions in suicide letters. 2021.

Y. Sun, G. Livan, A. Ma, and V. Latora. Interdisciplinary researchers attain better performance

in funding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13091, 2021.

J. A. V. Tohalino, L. V. C. Quispe, and D. R. Amancio. Analyzing the relationship between text fea-

tures and research proposal productivity. Scientometrics, 126:4255–4275, 2021. doi:10.1007/s11192-

021-03926-x.

J. V. Tohalino and D. R. Amancio. Extractive multi-document summarization using multilayer

networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 503:526–539, 2018.

Y. Wang, B. F. Jones, and D. Wang.

Early-career setback and future career impact.

Nature

communications, 10(1):1–10, 2019.

A. Zeng, Z. Shen, J. Zhou, J. Wu, Y. Fan, Y. Wang, and H. E. Stanley. The science of science:

From the perspective of complex systems. Physics Reports, 714:1–73, 2017.

23




## Appendix A: List of Supervised Classiﬁers


In this section we describe the main classiﬁers used to predict the productivity of research

grants. In addition to the traditional machine learning algorithms, we also used a technique

to combine all considered pattern recognition methods.


## 1. k-Neatest Neighbors (kNN): With the aim of classifying an unknown element from



## dataset, the kNN method ﬁrst selects the k-nearest elements from the training dataset.


Then, the category assigned to the unknown element corresponds to the majority class

which is detected in the selected k-set. k is an important parameter of the algorithm

and is chosen via optimization methods (Amancio et al. 2014).


## 2. Support Vector Machines (SVM): Given the training examples, this method constructs


a hyperplane with the aim of ﬁnding a separation between the classes of the dataset.

This method has several parameters, including parameters that sets the kernel function

used to create a hyperplane (Amancio et al. 2014).


## 3. Naive Bayes (NB): This classiﬁer is a supervised learning algorithm the uses Bayes’


theorem with a strong assumption that features are independent (McCallum et al.

1998). In this sense, the following equation is used to predict the class ˆy:

n

Y

i=1

P(xi|y)

(A1)

ˆy = argmax

y

P(y)

where xi is a feature. The training dataset can be used to compute the probabilities

P(y) and P(xi|y). Additional parameters related to this method and the optimization

process are described elsewhere (Amancio et al. 2014).


## 4. Multilayer Perceptron (MLP): This method is based on a neural network model con-


sidering one or more hidden layers which has a training process that usually involves

the Back-Propagation algorithm (Haykin 2008). Two main hyper-parameters exists

in this model: (i) the number of layers; and (ii) the number of neurons for each layer.

These parameters can also be chosen via optimization.


## 5. Decision trees: decision tree methods create models that able to predict the value of


a target variable by learning decision rules. The rules are inferred from several input

24



variables, i.e. the features. A typical decision tree comprises nodes and edges, where

nodes represent features and edges represent the decision chosen for each attribute.

Each internal with children is labeled with some input feature, while leaf nodes are

labeled with a class. The classiﬁcation process starts at the root node and ends when

a leaf node is reached. As the decision walks through nodes, a rule is applied and the

decision on that rule guides the choice of the children to be chosen as next step. Once

the decision reaches a leaf node, the predicted label corresponds to the respective label

stored in that node (Breiman 2001)

The choice of features that are evaluated in each node depends on the feature rele-

vance metric that decides which feature best discriminates the dataset. One important

relevance metric is the Gini impurity (Nembrini et al. 2018), a metric that has already

been used to evaluate the relevance of features in the context of productivity predic-

tion (Tohalino et al. 2021). The Gini impurity measures how often a randomly selected

instance from the dataset would be mislabeled if it was randomly classiﬁed according

to the distribution of the categories in the considered subset. A feature is considered

signiﬁcant in a given node if the test performed using that feature results in a decrease

in the Gini impurity. The relevance of a feature is obtained by averaging the decrease

in impurity computed in all tree nodes using the considered feature.


## 6. Ensemble learning: ensemble methods combine the predictions of several machine


learning algorithms in order to obtain a better predictive performance over a single


## method (Dietterich 2000). Most ensemble methods build several estimators indepen-


dently, and then they average the predictions of each method. Usually the voting


## method is a simple, yet eﬀective approach designed to combine the predictions from


several supervised classiﬁers. In this approach, the input classiﬁers are trained and

tested independently. Then the observed predictions from all classiﬁers are combined

by using a majority vote to predict the class labels. Therefore, the class receiving

the highest number of votes is chosen as the ﬁnal predicted class (Ruta and Gabrys

2005). When a draw occurs, we used the membership strength (Kumbure et al. 2020)

provided by each classiﬁer to make a decision.

25




## Appendix B: Results obtained from the evaluation of each research feature


TABLE V: Accuracy rate obtained when considering the classiﬁcation with single features.

We considered projects from the following areas: Medicine, Dentistry and Veterinary

Medicine. The best results for each classiﬁer are highlighted.

Research Projects on Medicine

DTrees

SVM

kNN

Bayes

MLP

Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%) Accuracy (%)

pubFeat

59.48 ± 0.64

61.24 ± 0.40 59.36 ± 0.81 57.51 ± 0.43

61.21 ± 0.53

pubCitFeat 59.67 ± 0.85

61.36 ± 0.36

58.80 ± 0.35

56.56 ± 0.42 61.37 ± 0.39

grntFeat

59.91 ± 0.75

58.68 ± 0.63

57.14 ± 0.92

55.43 ± 0.53

57.98 ± 1.31

areaFeat

54.45 ± 0.86

55.25 ± 0.93

53.13 ± 1.11

55.05 ± 0.39

54.46 ± 0.95

collabFeat

58.84 ± 0.93

59.14 ± 1.06

57.63 ± 0.73

57.51 ± 0.42

60.06 ± 0.99

instFeatA

48.94 ± 1.25

48.73 ± 1.48

50.28 ± 0.05

49.59 ± 0.47

49.09 ± 1.16

instFeatB

56.80 ± 0.62

58.94 ± 0.67

52.33 ± 2.24

59.37 ± 0.81

59.30 ± 0.74

instFeatC

56.85 ± 1.13

58.25 ± 0.46

51.08 ± 0.53

50.40 ± 0.43

58.90 ± 0.49

subjFeatA

59.70 ± 0.53

61.61 ± 0.34

55.17 ± 2.12 60.95 ± 0.44 60.16 ± 0.94

subjFeatB

61.89 ± 0.93 62.07 ± 0.70 59.05 ± 0.83

59.77 ± 0.36

61.32 ± 1.02

subjFeatC

59.24 ± 0.92

59.24 ± 0.76

55.35 ± 1.98

58.93 ± 0.60

59.06 ± 0.65

Features

Features

Research Projects on Dentistry

DTrees

SVM

kNN

Bayes

MLP

pubFeat

58.40 ± 0.96

60.41 ± 0.26

58.05 ± 1.03

58.09 ± 0.40

59.56 ± 0.68

pubCitFeat 55.57 ± 0.86

60.24 ± 0.11

55.90 ± 0.39

57.52 ± 0.17

60.12 ± 0.56

grntFeat

58.02 ± 0.59

57.03 ± 0.54

57.92 ± 0.50

52.18 ± 0.55

57.78 ± 0.45

areaFeat

55.35 ± 0.65

54.11 ± 1.01

53.12 ± 0.68

53.11 ± 0.14

55.81 ± 0.83

collabFeat

58.20 ± 0.87

59.38 ± 0.45 58.50 ± 0.98 59.32 ± 0.33

58.39 ± 0.61

instFeatA

51.97 ± 0.40

51.67 ± 0.42

50.04 ± 0.14

50.21 ± 0.15

51.61 ± 0.41

instFeatB

54.92 ± 0.57

58.20 ± 0.56

54.37 ± 1.43

58.09 ± 0.39

58.36 ± 0.23

instFeatC

54.48 ± 0.87

59.46 ± 0.56

51.05 ± 0.30

49.93 ± 0.31

58.74 ± 0.67

subjFeatA

57.90 ± 1.10 61.74 ± 0.48 53.63 ± 1.01 61.53 ± 0.17 59.12 ± 0.43

subjFeatB

59.01 ± 0.61 59.50 ± 0.65

58.13 ± 0.83

61.22 ± 0.23

59.34 ± 1.04

subjFeatC

58.61 ± 1.16

61.13 ± 0.74

57.41 ± 0.78

59.59 ± 0.33 63.00 ± 0.55

Features

Research Projects on Veterinary Medicine

DTrees

SVM

kNN

Bayes

MLP

pubFeat

63.82 ± 1.45 65.58 ± 0.76 64.10 ± 1.27 62.68 ± 0.62 65.67 ± 0.72

pubCitFeat 62.82 ± 0.95

64.08 ± 0.88

60.33 ± 0.95

59.66 ± 0.71

64.49 ± 1.14

grntFeat

58.50 ± 1.81

56.90 ± 1.58

58.75 ± 2.40

55.30 ± 0.69

58.00 ± 1.46

areaFeat

52.37 ± 1.95

51.66 ± 2.27

52.01 ± 1.66

53.19 ± 1.04

52.27 ± 2.46

collabFeat

60.75 ± 1.53

64.31 ± 2.00

60.11 ± 0.96

61.61 ± 1.34

64.85 ± 1.51

instFeatA

51.80 ± 1.10

51.34 ± 0.96

49.98 ± 0.39

50.04 ± 0.45

51.42 ± 1.17

instFeatB

61.26 ± 1.07

63.45 ± 1.26

54.02 ± 3.25

61.95 ± 0.93

64.14 ± 1.04

instFeatC

61.18 ± 1.16

63.07 ± 1.43

50.89 ± 0.45

52.07 ± 2.94

62.87 ± 0.81

subjFeatA

61.63 ± 1.44 65.69 ± 1.24 60.44 ± 2.39 63.96 ± 1.09 63.88 ± 1.88

subjFeatB

63.33 ± 1.63

65.10 ± 1.48

60.78 ± 2.38

63.82 ± 1.42

60.45 ± 1.24

subjFeatC

61.69 ± 0.85

63.49 ± 1.48

62.30 ± 0.93

61.66 ± 1.07

62.83 ± 1.96

26