This is an accepted manuscript version for an article to be

published in the journal Scientometrics.

Copyright to the final published article belongs to

Springer/Akadémiai Kiadó.

If you wish to cite this paper prior to publication please use

the following reference:

Maddi, A. and Sapinho, D. (2022) ‘Article Processing Charges, Altmetrics and

Citation Impact: Is there an economic rationale?’, Scientometrics. In press.

Doi: 10.1007/s11192-022-04284-y



Article Processing Charges, Altmetrics and Citation Impact: Is there

an economic rationale?

Abdelghani Maddi1, David Sapinho2

1 abdelghani.maddi@hceres.fr

Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques, Hcéres, 2 Rue Albert Einstein, Paris, 75013 France.

2 david.sapinho@hceres.fr

Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques, Hcéres, 2 Rue Albert Einstein, Paris, 75013 France


## Abstract


The present study aims to analyze 1) the relationship between Citation Normalized Score of scientific

publications and Article Processing Charges (APCs) of Gold Open Access (OA) publications 2) the

determinants of APCs. To do so, we used APCs information provided by the OpenAPC database,

citation scores of publications from the WoS database and, for Altmetrics, data from Altmetrics.com


## database, over the period from 2006 to 2019 for 83,752 articles published in 4751 journals belonging


to 267 distinct publishers. Results show that contrary to common belief, paying high APCs does not

necessarily increase the impact of publications. First, large publishers with high impact are not the most

expensive. Second, publishers with the highest APCs are not necessarily the best in terms of impact.

Correlation between APCs and impact is moderate. Regarding the determinants, results indicate that

APCs are on average 50% higher in hybrid journals than in full OA journals. The results also suggest

that Altmetrics do not have a great impact: OA articles that have garnered the most attention on internet

are articles with relatively low APCs. Another interesting result is that the "number of readers" indicator

is more effective as it is more correlated with classic bibliometrics indicators than the Altmetrics score.

Keywords

Article Processing Charges; Citation impact; Altmetrics; publisher; Open Access; bibliometric

indicators.

Acknowledgement

The present paper is a substantially extended version of the contribution (Maddi and Sapinho, 2021)

presented at the ISSI 2021 – 18th International Conference on Scientometrics & Informetrics – Leuven,

Belgium.

The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees and the guest-editor for their very helpful

comments, which have significantly improved the quality of this paper.

1 Corresponding author : Abdelghani Maddi, Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques, Hcéres, 2 Rue Albert Einstein, Paris, 75013, France,

T. 33 (0)1 55 55 61 48.

2




## Introduction


Since the start of the 21st century, the scientific community has witnessed an unprecedented

popularity of the Open Access (OA) movement (Björk, 2004; Chen-Chi, 2006; Sotudeh and

Estakhr, 2018). A successful transition into an OA publishing model is seen as a good way to

ensure better dissemination of knowledge and more equity between researchers, especially for

those from institutions in low-income countries faced with the issue of paying subscription fees

(Prosser, 2003; Tananbaum, 2003; Solomon and Björk, 2012; Cary and Rockwell, 2020).

However, OA does not necessarily mean "free", and raises the question of the business model

underlying scientific publishing. For institutions, it may even generate new costs: in addition

to the subscription fees, they are increasingly led to pay costs of OA publication (Maddi, 2020;

Maddi and Sapinho, 2021). This concerns a part of Gold OA publications which are based on

the "author-pays" business model (Rizor and Holley, 2014; Sotudeh, Ghasempour and Yaghtin,

2015). Thus, authors pay the "Article Processing Charges" (APCs), usually via their institution

or via their project money, to allow open access to the publication (Asai, 2019; Khoo, 2019;

Bruns, Rimmert and Taubert, 2020; Copiello, 2020).

The APCs have increased significantly over time. This rise has been estimated at three times

faster than it be if indexed to inflation (Khoo 2019). The trend appears to be stronger in more

frequently cited journals, as highlighted for Biomed Central journals (Asai 2020), medical and

specific OA journals (Asai 2019). These findings would also suggest that large subscription

journal publishers tend to set higher APCs. Nevertheless, there is no evidence to date that the


## introduction of APCs for a given journal reduced its publications volume (Khoo, 2019). In


other words, once able to pay an APC, authors give little emphasis to their amount. The APC-

based publishing model is being more and more integrated by academic institutions that aspire

to switch to an economic model excluding subscription fees. Thus, APCs are a considerable

burden on "total cost of publication” for institutions, reaching 10% in 2013 (Pinfield, Salter

and Bath, 2016).

While many studies have described relationships between OA publications and citation level

(Gumpenberger, Ovalle-Perandones and Gorraiz, 2013; Zhang and Watson, 2017; Piwowar et

al., 2018), only few have focused on the amount of APCs, with heterogeneous findings. On

one hand, APCs based journals have been regarded, in general, as more cited than other OA

journals (Björk and Solomon, 2012) , on the other hand, it was concluded that both categories

have, on average, similar performances with some disciplinary differences (Ghane, Niazmand

and Sabet Sarvestani, 2020). Another study analyzed the relationship between APCs and

scientific impact of publications using respectively DOAJ and Scopus data (Björk and

Solomon, 2015). On a set of 61,081 publications and 595 journals, authors showed that there

is a moderate correlation (0.4) between the two indicators at the journal level (APCs and

impact). Correlation is greater (0.6) when data is weighted by the volume of articles for each

journal (article level), suggesting that publishers take quality into account when pricing their

journals. Likewise, authors are also sensitive to journal quality in their submission choices.

The objective of this study is twofold. First, it aims to analyze the relationship between citations

normalized score of scientific publications and APCs amounts. Second, to determine whether

the type of journal as well as its academic and societal impact can play a role on the

determination of APCs. In other words, do the journals consider their academic and societal

impact when billing APCs?

This research could be undertaken by using and crossing various sources of information using

DOI. APCs for 109,141 publications, covering the period 2006 to 2019 were extracted from

the OpenAPC database (https://treemaps.intact-project.org/), citations scores from our in-

house Web of Science database (WoS) and Altmetrics from the Altmetric.com database. This

paper is an improved version of the contribution (Maddi and Sapinho, 2021) presented at the

3



ISSI 2021 – 18th International Conference on Scientometrics & Informetrics – Leuven,

Belgium.

From the initial dataset, 83,752 publications were used to study the link between APCs and

impact, while 62,532 publications were used to analyze the determinants of APCs. To the

extent that large, high impact publishers/journals may request high APCs, it is expected that

quality will be strongly correlated with the APCs. The latter would therefore explain the

publications visibility. Altmetrics scores were also expected to be correlated with APCs.


## Data


APCs data

APCs data has been extracted from the OpenAPC database. Maintaining this database is an

initiative that involves 231 institutions worldwide (5 from North America, 255 from Europe

and 1 from East Asia) that publish data sets on fees paid for OA journal articles under an open


## database license. At the beginning of March 2020, the database contained 109,141 publications


and 6,941 journals.

Each publication in this database is only assigned to the institution that implemented it,

ignoring, therefore, other collaborating institutions. For more details about Open APC database

see: https://treemaps.intact-project.org/page/about.html

OST data on citation impact and disciplines

The data about citations scores and disciplinary assignation of publications has been extracted

from the french Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques’ (OST) in-house database. It includes

five indexes of WoS available from Clarivate Analytics (SCIE, SSCI, AHCI, CPCI-SSH and

CPCI-S) and corresponds to WoS content indexed through the end of March 2019. See

https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/solutions/webofscience-platform/.

Among

the

109,141 publications indexed in the OpenAPC database, 83,752 were also found in the WoS


## database, using the DOI.


Altmetrics data

The data were extracted from the Altmetric.com database (https://www.altmetric.com) using

the R package "rAltmetric". This package has a bug which stops the request when it encouters

an unindexed DOI. The script proposed by Gorka Navarrete (https://github.com/gorkang) fixed

the problem.

Of the 83,752 publications, 62,532 match the Altmetric.com database, for which all the

information

available

on

alternative

metrics

has

been

retrieved

(see:

https://help.altmetric.com/support/home).



Final databases

Figure 1 schematizes the overlap between the three databases.

4



OpenAPC

109,141

publications

Web of Science

83,752

publications

Altmetric.com

65,232

publications

Figure 1: Overlap between the OpenAPC, WoS and Altmetric.com databases

The final Web of Science dataset

The database used for analysis includes several pieces of information about publications from

the two data sources:

-

From the APC data : institution that declares the publication, APCs amounts, journal in

which they are published, country of the journal, publisher of journal and a flag

indicating whether the journal is hybrid. By matching the OpenAPC database to that of

OST.

-

From the WoS-OST in-house data : we estimate the impact of publications by

calculating the following indicators :

o Normalized Citations Score (NCS) at article level: we calculated the NCS of a

given article by dividing the number of citations received by the average number

of citations in the same disciplines and the same year (Waltman et al., 2011).

o Mean Normalized Citation Score (MNCS) at the publisher level: we calculated

the weighted average of the NCS scores, at the publisher level, based on all the

articles of journals that it publishes. In the case of the OpenAPC database, the

selection was restricted to OA articles only.

o Mean Normalized Impact of Journals (MNIJ) at journal and publisher level:  For

each journal, we calculated the average number of citations per article in this

journal for a given year, normalized by the average number of citations of all

journals in the same category and year. The overall MNIJ per publisher is the

average of the MNIJs by journal weighted by their respective number of

publications. The MNIJ finally used is based on the citations of publications

over a three-year period. MNIJ at journal level is quite different from that of

Clarivate

–

Journal

Citation

Indicator

(https://clarivate.com/wp-

content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2021/05/Journal-Citation-Indicator-discussion-

paper-2.pdf), insofar as it is calculated year by year (whereas JCI is calculated

for papers published in the prior three-year period) on the one hand, and does

not include the documents types in normalization on the other hand. This factor

does not appear to be essential in our analysis, as the majority of the documents

are articles.

5



-

Finally, we also calculated the number of countries per article, as a measure of

international collaboration.

The final Altmetric.com dataset

In addition to the variables presented above (from the WoS dataset), this subset of 65,232

publications contains information on alternative metrics and associated scores. For more

information on the extracted variables, see the description provided here: https://cran.r-

project.org/web/packages/rAltmetric/README.html.


## Method


In this article, we have carried out two models: the first one aims to analyze the link between

normalized citations and APCs, while the second one analyzes the determinants of APCs

including Altmetrics.

Model 1: Citation impact and APCs

Dependent variable and model choice

The dependent variable is the logarithm of Normalized Citations Score (labelled Log (NCS))

received by each publication during the period 2006-2019. To retain the zeros, we have added

1 to the NCS before making the logarithmic transformation. Log (NCS) is a continuous variable

with a lower boundary at zero and an upper boundary at infinity. Thus, a left censored Tobit

regression model is used to account for the disproportionate number of observations with zero

values, because, indeed, a significant proportion of the observations in our sample are zeros.

Tobit regressions avoid inconsistent estimates from OLS regression.

Explanatory variable

In this study, we seek to analyze to what extent the amount of APCs have an incidence on the

number of citations received by OA scientific publications. Our explanatory variable is

therefore the amount of APCs by publication.

Control variables

Journal impact and number of countries per publication are added as control variables. This

choice was driven by the literature that shows that citations depend on journal quality and

international collaboration (Maddi and Gingras, 2021). The hybrid status of a journal was also

included, using a dummy variable.

Model 2:  Determinants of APCs

Dependent variable and model choice

This model was built with data that integrates information on Altmetrics (the dataset of 65,232

publications published in 4099 journals). In this model, the dependent variable is the APCs by

journal. Our explorations have shown that APCs by journal tends to follow a lognormal

distribution. We, therefore, used a generalized linear model with a logarithmic transformation

of the APCs.

Explanatory variables

The explanatory variables of the APCs used in the model are, respectively,

 The type of the journal (dummy variable that designates whether the journal is hybrid

or fully in OA),

 The academic impact of the journal (designated by the normalized citations score)

 And finally the societal impact of the journal. Three variables are used to measure the

latter: the total readers count, context journal count and Altmetrics attention score.

While the first two measures provide information on the interest aroused by the

6



magazine on the internet, the Altmetrics score indicates in a way the media buzz it

generates (see table 1). The weights used to build this score are available in the

documentation (see: https://help.altmetric.com/support/solutions/articles/6000233311-how-

is-the-altmetric-attention-score-calculated-).

Control variables

The number of publications by discipline and by journal constitute the control variables of the

model. The OST disciplinary classification (of the 254 WoS subject categories) into 11

disciplines was used for this purpose (the classification scheme is available at:

https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/OST_disciplinary_classification/11897601).


## Results


In this section, we present the main results. First, we characterize the APCs data, namely:

evolution of the average amount paid by institutions, characteristics of the top 20 producing

publishers and then those of the most expensive one. Secondly, we present the correlation tests


## results between the amount of APCs on the one hand and the MNCS and MNIJ indicators on


the other hand. Finally, we present the regression results.

Overview of APCs data

Figure 2 shows the evolution of APCs average by publication in all the OpenAPC database,

and using a constant data set of publications from journals of 2006-09 period (79 journals). The

interest of this approach is to distinguish the differences in pricing practices between old

indexed journals and new indexed journals. Thus, several subscription-based journals began to

publish OA articles from 2010 by adopting a Hybrid model. This movement has accelerated

from 2013 (Besancenot and Vranceanu, 2017).

As we can see, the average amount has doubled between 2006 and 2019, going from 1,000

euros to almost 2,300 euros per publication. This is explained in particular by the new indexed

journals that have been indexed into the OpenAPC database after 2009, which significantly

increases the APCs average. Overall, APCs have increased significantly even for old journals

(2006-09) from 1,000 to 1,800 euros on average.

Figure 2: APCs Average per publication, total and with constant journal set

With all reservations that we can make on the Open APC database, we can hypothesize that

this increase is notably due to a rise in demand for OA publications. As is well known in

economics, increase in demand systematically leads to an increase in prices. Publishers are

therefore taking advantage of this enthusiasm for OA to increase their prices.

7



Figure 3 describes the distribution of publications in the OpenAPC database, in relation to the

amount of APCs, by discipline.

First, it highlights contrasting gold open access publication practices. This finding is similar to

that observed from the WoS data base for OA publications in previous studies (Maddi, 2020;

Maddi, Lardreau and Sapinho, 2021). However, the distribution is quite different than that of

all the publications where the weight of engineering or chemistry, for example, is higher (OST,

2019). Thus, nearly 50% of the publications in the OpenAPC database are in Fundamental

biology and Medical research, with respectively 23,466 and 19,669 publications. These two

disciplines account for only 30% of publications in the WoS database (and 42% of Gold open

access). The least present disciplines are mathematics, computer science and humanities. This


## result is largely explained by the overall size of these disciplines (see OST, 2019).


Figure 3: publications number and average APC by discipline

The average amount of APCs by discipline varies from € 1,800 (Mathematics and Humanities)

to € 2,150 (Fundamental biology and Chemistry). The difference is therefore not significantly

high depending on the discipline.

8



Table 1: top 20 producing publishers: publications numbers, APCs, MNIJ and MNCS

Publisher

# publications

Average

APCs

MNIJ

MNCS

Springer Nature

14103

1 992 €

1,75

1,29

Elsevier BV

12534

2 855 €

1,99

1,99

Public Library of Science (PLoS)

9027

1 448 €

1,46

1,04

Wiley-Blackwell

6959

2 351 €

1,78

1,63

Frontiers Media SA

5725

1 686 €

1,25

0,95

MDPI AG

3438

1 212 €

1,16

0,85

Springer Science + Business Media

3313

1 536 €

1,45

1,23

Oxford University Press (OUP)

3022

2 411 €

2,33

1,97

American Chemical Society (ACS)

2299

2 627 €

3,48

1,81

IOP Publishing

2127

1 569 €

1,55

1,37

Copernicus GmbH

1994

1 492 €

1,96

1,38

Informa UK Limited

1911

1 390 €

0,87

1,47

BMJ

1604

2 089 €

0,97

1,76

Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC)

1131

1 629 €

2,49

1,22

Optical Society of America (OSA)

905

1 891 €

1,72

1,91

SAGE Publications

829

929 €

0,85

1,55

Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers (IEEE)

803

1 505 €

1,82

3,12

The Royal Society

774

1 926 €

1,80

1,48

Hindawi Publishing Corporation

739

1 370 €

0,67

0,53

Ovid Technologies (Wolters Kluwer Health)

715

3 215 €

1,41

1,82

Table 1 shows that more than half of publications are concentrated in the top 5 publishers. With

a few exceptions, APCs are lower for large publishers than for the overall average. The MNIJ

is higher than the world average for almost all publishers. Likewise for the MNCS.

Furthermore, Table 1 shows that for some publishers, impact of publications (MNCS) is much

higher than that of journals (MNIJ). This is particularly the case for the publishers "Informa

UK Limited" and "BMJ". Explanation can be found in the fact that the majority of journals for

these publishers (respectively, 87 and 93%) are either closed or hybrid. As demonstrated in the

literature, OA publications are more cited than non-OA ones (Eysenbach, 2006; Bautista-Puig

et al., 2020; Ghane, Niazmand and Sabet Sarvestani, 2020). Consequently, MNCS of

publications indexed in the OpenAPC database would be systematically higher than the

average impact of journals in which they are published.

Table 2 shows that among the largest publishers, only Elsevier BV is listed in the top 20 most

expensive ones (20th position), that are mostly American. We can also note that both impact

of publications and impact of journals are high. Some exceptions can be made, especially for

"MyJove Corporation" publisher with an average amount of 3081 euros for a very low impact.

Similarly, "The American Association of Immunologists" charges for expensive APCs, while

the average impact of journals and publications is at the level of the world average.

9



Table 2: top 20 most expensive publishers: publications numbers, APCs, MNIJ and MNCS

Publisher

# publications

Average

APCs

MNIJ

MNCS

American Society for Nutrition

47

4 761 €

2,34

2,32

American Medical Association (AMA)

28

4 624 €

2,70

5,73

American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)

23

4 588 €

1,35

2,63

Rockefeller University Press

66

4 466 €

3,64

2,32

American Psychological Association (APA)

132

3 754 €

1,45

1,86

American Society for Clinical Investigation

96

3 656 €

3,49

2,80

Royal College of Psychiatrists

64

3 630 €

1,45

1,98

EMBO

162

3 410 €

3,13

2,29

European Respiratory Society (ERS)

29

3 293 €

1,44

1,80

Ovid Technologies (Wolters Kluwer Health)

715

3 215 €

1,41

1,82

American Association for Cancer Research (AACR)

73

3 175 €

2,05

1,45

Nature Publishing Group

350

3 115 €

3,97

2,31

American Association for the Advancement of

Science (AAAS)

166

3 085 €

4,97

3,36

MyJove Corporation

110

3 081 €

0,33

0,26

The Company of Biologists

414

3 017 €

1,76

1,08

The Endocrine Society

135

3 017 €

2,09

1,42

Society for Neuroscience

233

2 982 €

2,53

1,56

The American Association of Immunologists

87

2 976 €

1,08

1,06

Mary Ann Liebert Inc

117

2 872 €

1,21

1,08

Elsevier BV

12534

2 855 €

1,99

1,99

APCs and Citation impact

Correlation test

We performed a Spearman correlation test on four variables at publisher level: publications

number (pub_nbr), APCs average (APCs_avg), MNIJ and MNCS. The results are presented in

figure 4.

Figure 4: Spearman correlation matrix at publisher level

All coefficients are significant at 5%. We observe that the number of publications is more

correlated with the MNIJ (0.52) than with the MNCS (0.36). This means that within the

OpenAPC database there are small publishers whose publications have high citations scores

and large publishers with low citations scores. We also note that the number of publications

10



per publisher is moderately correlated with the amount of APCs. This would mean that there

is no evidence of relationship between the size of publisher and the amount of APCs.

Figure 5: APCs average per publication

Figure 5 shows correlation plots between on the one hand MNIJ and APCs (figure 5a), and on

the other hand the MNCS and the APCs (figure 5b). The correlation between MNIJ and the

amount of APCs is much higher (0.54 against 0.45). This shows that publishers take the quality

into account when pricing their journals. However, prices do not necessarily translate into

impact, as long as the APCs are only moderately correlated with the MNCS.

Regression results

Table 3 summarizes Tobit regression results for explaining NCS by the amount of APCs.

Regression was carried out in two stages. First, only the explanatory variable was integrated

(Log APC per publication - model 1). Then, control variables were added (model 2).

Table 3: Tobit maximum likelihood estimation for log NCS

Model_1

Model_2

Variables_type

Variables

Coefficient

Pr(>|z|)

Coefficient

Pr(>|z|)

Explanatory

𝐿𝑜𝑔 (𝐴𝑃𝐶𝑠)

0.22***

<2.22e-16

0.012***

5.25e-05

𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑗𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡)

-

-

0.471***

<2e-16

𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠_𝑛𝑏𝑟)

-

-

0.100***

<2e-16

Control

𝐼𝑠_ℎ𝑦𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑑

-

-

0.204***

<2e-16

Wald-statistic

2667

<2.22e-16

1.238e+04

<2.22e-16

Log-likelihood

-8.063e+04

<2.22e-16

-7.607e+04

<2.22e-16

#publications

83,753

#Left-censored

11907

#Uncensored

71846

#Right-censored

0

***Significant at 1%



Table 3 shows that when control variables are not taken into account, the APCs strongly affects

citation score (model 1). Once control variables are integrated, the effect of the APCs drops

significantly but still has a positive and significant impact on citations. Another interesting


## result is the impact of hybrid journals. Thus, if the journal is hybrid, citations score is higher.


In other words, OA articles published in hybrid journals are generally more cited than OA

articles published in 100% APCs journals. This is to be expected, given that not all well-

Model

statistics

11



established journals in the market have adopted a fully OA business model (Traag and

Waltman, 2019). On the other hand, the main large publishers have massively integrated the

hybrid model from 2013 (Besancenot and Vranceanu, 2017). In contrast, many fully OA

journals are recently created journals that still have not built such a strong reputation for quality

(some might even be aiming for average-level reputation and impact if this maximizes income

– see (Traag and Waltman, 2019)). Hybrid journals are therefore more likely to be, at moment,

in a virtuous circle where they receive higher quality manuscripts than fully OA journals, which

translates to higher NCS of the published articles.

The determinants of APCs

In this section, the corpus including data on Altmetrics has been used (the dataset of 65,232

publications published in 4099 journals). This section consists of three parts: 1) descriptive

statistics on the distribution by discipline of the average Altmetrics scores per article, the

average number of readers per article and the average APCs in this dataset. 2) Correlation tests,


## 3) and finally the results of the multiple linear regression on the determinants of APCs.


Descriptive statistics

Table 4: APCs, Altmetrics score and readers count by discipline (rounded values)

APCs

(average per

Discipline

Altmetrics score

(average per article)

Readers count

(average per article)

article)

Multidisciplinary

34

71

1 680 €

Social Sciences

31

99

1 977 €

Humanities

30

70

1 777 €

Applied Biology Ecology

23

84

1 937 €

Medical Research

23

77

2 185 €

Earth sciences Astrophysics

21

72

2 020 €

Fundamental biology

18

79

2 213 €

Chemistry

9

64

2 230 €

Physics

9

45

1 976 €

Computer Science

8

78

2 013 €

Engineering

7

84

2 138 €

Mathematics

6

34

1 999 €

Table 4 shows an asymmetric distribution of the Altmetrics scores according to discipline. The

same applies to the average number of readers per article. As can be seen in table 4, the

disciplines with the highest Altmetrics scores (after the Multidisciplinary category) are Social

sciences and Humanities. These disciplines also have higher than average readership numbers,

with the highest number of readers per article averaging 99 in the social sciences. This result

is expected insofar as the social sciences and humanities are aimed at a large audience and are

more inclined to provoke reactions on the internet, unlike applied disciplines. Mathematics is

the discipline with the lowest scores (Altmetrics and number of readers). Other disciplines such

as Engineering or Computer science have low Altmetrics scores, but a high average number of

readers. Regarding APCs by discipline, the differences are quite small, with a similar

distribution to that presented in the previous section (WoS dataset).

12



Note here that these results may be a consequence of the characteristics of the used database

(OpenAPC) and its crossover with the Altmetrics.com and WoS databases.

Correlation test

Figure 6 shows the results of Spearman's correlation tests at the journal level (the crossed out

coefficients are not significant at 5%). As can be seen, the Altmetrics score weakly correlated

with the average impact of journals as well as with the average impact of open access

publications of these journals. The correlation between APCs and Altmetrics score is low. The

correlation between APCs and number of readers is moderate. This suggests that the open

access articles that have garnered the most attention on the internet are not necessarily articles

for which the authors have paid high APCs. Finally, note that the Altmetrics score is highly

correlated with the number of citing posts and accounts.

Figure 6: Spearman correlation matrix at journal level

Regression results

Table 5 shows the results of multiple linear regression. The explained variable is the APCs of

4099 journals. The explanatory and control variables were gradually integrated into models 1,

2, 3 and 4. Several interesting results from table 5 should be highlighted:

13



Table 5: Multiple Linear Regression Results

Model_1

Model_2

Model_3

Model_4

Dependent variable : log(APCs) of 4099

journals

Coefficient Pr(>|z|)

Coefficient Pr(>|z|)

Coefficient

Pr(>|z|)

Coefficient Pr(>|z|)

Intercept

7.19***

<2.22E-16

6.89***

<2.22E-16

6.46***

< 2E-16

6.52***

< 2E-16

Journal type

Is_hybrid

0.46***

<2.22E-16

0.46***

<2.22E-16

0.43***

< 2E-16

0.50***

< 2E-16

Impact of journal

(log transformed)

MNIJ

-

-

0.42***

<2.22E-16

0.31***

< 2E-16

0.28***

< 2E-16

Explanatory

variables

Readers count

-

-

-

-

0.05***

1.11E-06

0.05***

2.60E-06

Altmetrics score

-

-

-

-

-0.01*

6.81E-02

-0.01*

9.12E-02

Context journal count

-

-

-

-

0.05***

< 2E-16

0.04***

5.66E-09

Altmetrics (log

transformed)

Humanities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.03*

6.20E-02

Mathematics

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.02

5.69E-01

Physics

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.03**

4.56E-02

Applied biology-ecology

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.01

3.38E-01

Social sciences

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.07***

3.34E-13

Disciplines (log

of the number of

Control

variables

Computer sciences

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.02

2.66E-01

Earth sciences-astrology

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.02*

9.50E-02

Engineering

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.01

3.29E-01

Medical research

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.08***

< 2E-16

Chemistry

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.01

5.64E-01

Fund biology

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.03***

2.92E-04

papers by

discipline)

Ajusted R2

0.11

0.20

0.23

0.26

Dispersion parameter

0.24

0.22

0.21

0.20

Number of Newton-

Model statistics

Raphson Iterations

2

2

2

2

AIC

5789.5

5338.1

5224.9

5042

*** Significant at 1% / ** Significant at 5% / * Significant at 10%.



 The type of journal plays a huge role in determining APCs. Thus, if the journal is

hybrid, the APCs are on average 50% higher than if it is entirely in open access (taking

into account all the variables in the model 4). This result may at first glance seem

counterintuitive as the business model of fully open access journals is based primarily

on the publication fees they charge, which may justify high APCs. Part of the

explanation can be found in the fact that some hybrid journals are well-established

journals in the market with high impact.

 The link between APCs and the average impact of journals is positive and statistically

significant. These results suggest that, overall, the journals take into account their

average impact when fixing APCs. In the case of model 4, an increase in impact of 1%

is reflected in an increase in APCs of 28%.

 Regarding the societal impact, several lessons can be drawn: the journals do not

necessary consider their Altmetrics score when determining APCs. The results even

suggest the existence of a slight negative effect of the Altmetrics score on APCs. This

would mean that the articles with the highest Altmetrics scores are articles with

relatively lower APCs.

 The "Reader count" and "Context journal count" indicators have a positive and

significant impact on APCs. This impact remains 6 to 7 times lower than that observed

for the academic impact (average impact of journals).


## Conclusion and discussion


Throughout this article, we have analyzed two questions related to APCs. The first one is the

relationship between APCs and academic impact. Based on a large sample of 83,752

publications our study empirically verifies the belief that if we pay high costs for publication,

impact would necessarily be high. This belief stems from the fact that an author or an institution

may think that all publishers who charge a high price for APCs and indexed in international


## databases like WoS, necessarily have a high academic quality. Our results show that contrary


to this belief, paying high costs does not necessarily increase impact of publications. First, large

publishers with high impact are not the most expensive in terms of APCs. Second, publishers

with highest APCs are not necessarily the bests in terms of impact. Correlation between APCs

and impact is moderate.

The second question addressed in this study are the determinants of APCs. More precisely, to

what extent the journals take into account their academic and societal impact in determining

the APCs. Our results indicate that the type of journal has a strong impact on APCs. Thus, if

the journal is hybrid, the APCs are on average 50% higher than if it is entirely in OA. The

average impact of the journals also enters, but to a lesser extent, in the determination of APCs.

Regarding Altmetrics, the results suggest that they do not have a great impact on APCs. This

is particularly the case for the Altmetrics score. The regression results even indicate the

opposite. In other words, the OA articles that have garnered the most attention on the internet

are articles with low APCs. Another interesting result is that the "number of readers" indicator

is more effective and is more correlated with classic impact indicators than the Altmetrics

score.

Our results on Altmetrics are consistent with existing studies on the precautions to be taken

when using this type of indicator (Sud and Thelwall, 2014; Elmore, 2018; Repiso, Castillo-

Esparcia and Torres-Salinas, 2019; Thelwall, 2020). The indicator that best reflects the

academic impact is the number of readers (Yang et al., 2021), while the Altmetrics score is

weakly correlated with traditional bibliometric indicators (e.g. citation impact). The results of

the regression point in the same direction.



Otherwise, in the econometric analysis we have shown that citations score of publications is

strongly determined by the impact of journal in which it is published. This result agrees with

several studies which show it empirically (Waltman and Traag, 2017). International

collaboration also plays an important role in citations score. This result is also consistent with

the literature (Larivière et al., 2015).

Another interesting result relates to the impact of hybrid journals versus 100% APCs journals.

The regression results indicate that if the journal is hybrid, the NCS is stronger than if it is fully

open. This result is consistent with another previous study on the same database (OpenAPC)

which showed that journal’s impact and hybrid status are the most important factors for the

level of APCs (Schönfelder, 2020).

Our results have several implications for public policy and authors choices when it comes to

submit their publications. First, the strong interest for OA had an immediate effect on the

publishing market. Prices of OA publications have increased exponentially. This increase is

disproportionate to the academic impact. The impact of publications for which authors have

paid high costs is no better than that of publications with low APCs. Impact may even be lower.

We also showed that some publishers are taking advantage of the OA movement to demand

high APCs, while their academic impact is very low. Finally, our results suggest that, for

authors, APCs should not be used as an indicator for journals selection for submission. For

efficient management, institutions should be attentive to journals quality before granting funds

for OA publication.

Limitations

The main limitation of this study is the representativeness of the database.  Yet, this should not

affect the results concerning the link between APCs, Altmetrics and citation impact, which is

our research question and the main object of the study.

Indeed, the citation distribution is homogeneous with that of WoS or other bibliometric


## databases. Moreover, even if we observe an institutional bias, the database (OpenAPC)


includes articles from publishers that represent more than 97% of the market share. As we used

averages by publisher, the latter should apply the same prices regardless of the institution.

Consequently, this bias should not hide specificities linked to APCs or citation practices.

However, we must be careful about the generalization of the results of this article given the

representativeness of the database.


## References




Asai, S. (2019) ‘Determinants of Article Processing Charges for Medical Open Access Journals’,

Journal of Electronic Publishing, 22(1). doi: 10.3998/3336451.0022.103.

Bautista-Puig, N. et al. (2020) ‘Do journals flipping to gold open access show an OA citation or

publication advantage?’, Scientometrics, 124(3), pp. 2551–2575. doi:10.1007/s11192-020-03546-

x.

Besancenot, D. and Vranceanu, R. (2017) ‘A model of scholarly publishing with hybrid academic

journals’, Theory and Decision, 82(1), pp. 131–150. doi:10.1007/s11238-016-9553-0.

Björk, B.-C. (2004) ‘Open Access to Scientific Publications – An Analysis of the Barriers to

Change?’ Available at: https://helda.helsinki.fi/dhanken/handle/10227/647 (Accessed: 6 March

2020).

Björk, B.-C. and Solomon, D. (2012) ‘Open access versus subscription journals: a comparison of

scientific impact’, BMC Medicine, 10(1), p. 73. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-73.

Björk, B.-C. and Solomon, D. (2015) ‘Article processing charges in OA journals: relationship

between price and quality’, Scientometrics, 103(2), pp. 373–385. doi: 10.1007/s11192-015-1556-z.

16



Bruns, A., Rimmert, C. and Taubert, N. (2020) ‘Who pays? Comparing cost sharing models for a

Gold Open Access publication environment’, arXiv:2002.12092 [cs]. Available at:

http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.12092 (Accessed: 4 March 2020).

Cary, M. and Rockwell, T. (2020) ‘International Collaboration in Open Access Publications: How

Income Shapes International Collaboration’, Publications, 8(1), p. 13. doi:

10.3390/publications8010013.

Chen-Chi, C. (2006) ‘Business models for open access journals publishing’, Online Information

Review, 30(6), pp. 699–713. doi: 10.1108/14684520610716171.

Copiello, S. (2020) ‘Business as Usual with Article Processing Charges in the Transition towards OA

Publishing: A Case Study Based on Elsevier’, Publications, 8(1), p. 3. doi:

10.3390/publications8010003.

Elmore, S.A. (2018) ‘The Altmetric Attention Score: What Does It Mean and Why Should I Care?’,

Toxicologic Pathology, 46(3), pp. 252–255. doi:10.1177/0192623318758294.

Eysenbach, G. (2006) ‘Citation Advantage of Open Access Articles’, PLoS Biology. Edited by C.

Tenopir, 4(5), p. e157. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040157.

Ghane, M.R., Niazmand, M.R. and Sabet Sarvestani, A. (2020) ‘The citation advantage for open

access science journals with and without article processing charges’, Journal of Information

Science, 46(1), pp. 118–130. doi:10.1177/0165551519837183.

Gumpenberger, C., Ovalle-Perandones, M.-A. and Gorraiz, J. (2013) ‘On the impact of Gold Open

Access journals’, Scientometrics, 96(1), pp. 221–238. doi: 10.1007/s11192-012-0902-7.

Khoo, S. (2019) ‘Article Processing Charge Hyperinflation and Price Insensitivity: An Open Access

Sequel to the Serials Crisis’, LIBER Quarterly, 29(1), pp. 1–18. doi: 10.18352/lq.10280.

Larivière, V. et al. (2015) ‘Team size matters: Collaboration and scientific impact since 1900’,

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66(7), pp. 1323–1332. doi:

10.1002/asi.23266.

Maddi, A. (2020) ‘Measuring open access publications: a novel normalized open access indicator’,

Scientometrics, 124(1), pp. 379–398. doi: 10.1007/s11192-020-03470-0.

Maddi, A. and Gingras, Y. (2021) ‘Gender Diversity in Research Teams and Citation Impact in

Economics and Management’, Journal of Economic Surveys, 35(5), pp. 1381–1404.

doi:10.1111/joes.12420.

Maddi, A. and Sapinho, D. (2021) ‘Article Processing Charges based publications: to which extent the

price explains scientific impact?’, in 18th International Conference on Scientometrics &

Informetrics. Leuven, Belgium: International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics (I.S.S.I.),

pp. 741–752. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07348 (Accessed: 19 August 2021).

Maddi, A., Lardreau, E. and Sapinho, D. (2021) ‘Open access in Europe: a national and regional

comparison’, Scientometrics. doi: 10.1007/s11192-021-03887-1.

OST (2019) Dynamics of scientific production in the world, in Europe and in France, 2000-2016.

Paris, France: HCERES, p. 100. Available at: https://www.hceres.fr/fr/publications/dynamics-

scientific-production-world-europe-and-france-2000-2016-ost (Accessed: 23 September 2020).

Pinfield, S., Salter, J. and Bath, P. A. (2016) ‘The “total cost of publication” in a hybrid open-access

environment: Institutional approaches to funding journal article-processing charges in combination

with subscriptions’, Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 67(7), pp.

1751–1766. doi: 10.1002/asi.23446.

Piwowar, H. et al. (2018) ‘The state of OA: a large-scale analysis of the prevalence and impact of

Open Access articles’, PeerJ, 6, p. e4375. doi: 10.7717/peerj.4375.

Prosser, D. (2003) ‘The Next Information Revolution - How Open Access repositories and Journals

will Transform Scholarly Communications’, LIBER Quarterly, 14(1). doi: 10.18352/lq.7755.

Repiso, R., Castillo-Esparcia, A. and Torres-Salinas, D. (2019) ‘Altmetrics, alternative indicators for

Web of Science Communication studies journals’, Scientometrics, 119(2), pp. 941–958. doi:

10.1007/s11192-019-03070-7.

Rizor, S. L. and Holley, R. P. (2014) ‘Open Access Goals Revisited: How Green and Gold Open

Access Are Meeting (or Not) Their Original Goals’, Journal of Scholarly Publishing. doi:

10.3138/jsp.45.4.01.

17



Schönfelder, N. (2020) ‘Article processing charges: Mirroring the citation impact or legacy of the

subscription-based model?’, Quantitative Science Studies, 1(1), pp. 6–27. doi:

10.1162/qss_a_00015.

Solomon, D. J. and Björk, B.-C. (2012) ‘A study of open access journals using article processing

charges’, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(8), pp.

1485–1495. doi: 10.1002/asi.22673.

Sotudeh, H. and Estakhr, Z. (2018) ‘Sustainability of open access citation advantage: the case of

Elsevier’s author-pays hybrid open access journals’, Scientometrics, 115(1), pp. 563–576. doi:

10.1007/s11192-018-2663-4.

Sotudeh, H., Ghasempour, Z. and Yaghtin, M. (2015) ‘The citation advantage of author-pays model:

the case of Springer and Elsevier OA journals’, Scientometrics, 104(2), pp. 581–608. doi:

10.1007/s11192-015-1607-5.

Sud, P. and Thelwall, M. (2014) ‘Evaluating altmetrics’, Scientometrics, 98(2), pp. 1131–1143. doi:

10.1007/s11192-013-1117-2.

Tananbaum, G. (2003) ‘Of wolves and and boys: the scholarly communication crisis’, Learned

Publishing, 16(4), pp. 285–289. doi: 10.1087/095315103322422035.

Thelwall, M. (2020) ‘Measuring Societal Impacts of Research with Altmetrics? Common Problems

and Mistakes’, Journal of Economic Surveys, n/a(n/a). doi:10.1111/joes.12381.

Traag, V. and Waltman, L. (2019) ‘Persistence of journal hierarchy in open access publishing’, in

17th International conference on scientometrics and informetrics. STI2019, Rome, Italy, pp. 1339–


## 1345. Available at: https://zenodo.org/record/3250081/files/483_Plan%20S.pdf?download=1.


Waltman, L. and Traag, V. A. (2017) ‘Use of the journal impact factor for assessing individual

articles need not be wrong’, arXiv:1703.02334 [cs]. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02334

(Accessed: 6 March 2020).

Waltman, L. et al. (2011) ‘Towards a new crown indicator: Some theoretical considerations’, Journal

of Informetrics, 5(1), pp. 37–47. doi: 10.1016/j.joi.2010.08.001.

Yang, S. et al. (2021) ‘Are Altmetric.com scores effective for research impact evaluation in the social

sciences and humanities?’, Journal of Informetrics, 15(1), p. 101120. doi:

10.1016/j.joi.2020.101120.

Zhang, L. and Watson, E. M. (2017) ‘Measuring the Impact of Gold and Green Open Access’, The

Journal of Academic Librarianship, 43(4), pp. 337–345. doi: 10.1016/j.acalib.2017.06.004.

18