***

arXiv:2208.08221v4  [cs.DL]  25 Apr 2023

Which Factors are associated with Open

Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Study

Fakhri Momeni1*, Stefan Dietze1,3, Philipp Mayr1, Kristin

Biesenbender2 and Isabella Peters2

1*KTS, GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Unter

Sachsenhausen 6-8, Cologne, 50667, Germany.

2*Web Science, ZBW – Leibniz Information Centre for

Economics, D¨usternbrooker Weg 120, Kiel, 24105, Germany.

3*Computer Sciences, Heinrich-Heine-University D¨usseldorf,

Universit¨atsstr, D¨usseldorf, 40225, Germany.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): Fakhri.Momeni@gesis.org;

Contributing authors: Stefan.Dietze@gesis.org;

Philipp.Mayr@gesis.org; k.biesenbender@zbw.eu; i.peters@zbw.eu;


## Abstract


Open Access (OA) facilitates access to articles. But, authors or fun-

ders often must pay the publishing costs preventing authors who do not

receive ﬁnancial support from participating in OA publishing and cita-

tion advantage for OA articles. OA may exacerbate existing inequalities

in the publication system rather than overcome them. To investigate

this, we studied 522,411 articles published by Springer Nature. Employ-

ing correlation and regression analyses, we describe the relationship

between authors aﬃliated with countries from diﬀerent income lev-

els, their choice of publishing model, and the citation impact of their

papers. A machine learning classiﬁcation method helped us to explore

the importance of diﬀerent features in predicting the publishing model.

The results show that authors eligible for APC waivers publish more

in gold-OA journals than others. In contrast, authors eligible for an

APC discount have the lowest ratio of OA publications, leading to the

assumption that this discount insuﬃciently motivates authors to publish

in gold-OA journals. We found a strong correlation between the jour-

nal rank and the publishing model in gold-OA journals, whereas the OA

1



***

2

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

option is mostly avoided in hybrid journals. Also, results show that the

countries’ income level, seniority, and experience with OA publications

are the most predictive factors for OA publishing in hybrid journals.

Keywords: APC policies, bibliometrics, open access, citation impact,

machine learning

1 Introduction

The unrestricted availability of Open Access (OA) publications is linked to

the goal of granting all interested parties free access to scientiﬁc knowledge

and ensuring greater equality of access (Munaf`o et al., 2017). This view is

strongly related to the consumers of scholarly knowledge, who then would not

have to pay for access. However, when taking the authors of those articles into

account, they are aﬀected by OA in two diﬀerent ways: a) when choosing a

publication model for an article and b) when receiving citations (and along

with its reputation) for articles that have been published via a certain model

(usually described as citation advantage(Langham-Putrow, Bakker, & Riegel-

man, 2021)). Those two aspects of OA may introduce signiﬁcant biases and

inequity into the scholarly publication and reputation system since they may

restrict participation in OA in particular ways (Bahlai et al., 2019).

First, the OA publishing model generally shifts the publishing costs from

readers to authors or their institutions and funders by introducing article pro-

cessing charges (APCs). This can be a severe constraint for those authors who

cannot aﬀord these costs or do not receive any ﬁnancial support. To overcome

this issue, most publishers have implemented an APC waiver/discount policy

for authors from, e.g., low-income countries (Lawson, 2015). However, it is open

how the diﬀerent options for OA publishing and waivers/discounts are con-

sidered and adopted by researchers with various characteristics such as their

countries’ income level, but also their seniority and gender – factors which are

also often associated with the decision to publish OA (Iyandemye & Thomas,

2019; Olejniczak & Wilson, 2020; Simard, Ghiasi, Mongeon, & Larivi`ere, 2021;

Smith et al., 2022; Zhu, 2017). Rouhi, Beard, and Brundy (2022) discussed the

waiver issues from the perspectives of the publisher, institutions, and develop-

ing countries. They mentioned the potential unfairness authors are confronted

with, which may be caused by APC-based models. They argued that waiver

programs have yet to address this problem successfully. They suggested that

meeting the equity standard requires a cross-functional approach involving

publishers, funders, research institutions, individual researchers, libraries, and

service providers.

To accommodate OA publishing costs, three funding options have emerged

over time. First, Diamond OA journals are funded by public institutions such as

libraries, which enable free reading and publishing for all researchers. Second,

transformative agreements between public institutions and publishers have



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

been introduced that include reading and publishing contracts and which are

also funded by the institutions. In this case, there are no direct fees for authors,

but their institutions pay for the APCs as part of a consortium. Access to pub-

lishing and access to publications is limited to participating organizations only.

Thirdly, APCs could also be paid by the authors or their institutions them-

selves. The ﬁrst option leads to Gold OA at the journal level. Transformative

agreements allow authors to publish in either gold OA or hybrid (which – for a

fee – allow publishing individual articles as an OA-variant) journals. The third

option is often associated with hybrid journals. All other publishing models for

journals usually require funding via subscriptions, resulting in closed-access

articles (CA) that can only be read after paying the article or journal fee.

The publishing model is also strongly associated with the visibility of

authors and articles. For many researchers, it makes a diﬀerence where, i.e., in

which journals they publish (e.g., considering discipline-speciﬁc journal rank-

ings). If they want to be noticed by others and/or seek promotion, it can be

crucial to publish in reputable journals, especially for early career researchers.

And to achieve this, not only ﬁnancial hurdles and APCs have to be overcome,

but, for example, English language skills and technical skills are needed, as

well as institutions that can help with legal advice or infrastructure support.

Against this background, researchers have to decide which publishing model

to choose and whether OA is not only an altruistic but feasible option at all.

The second possible source of bias and inequity is related to the paying for

access case: It has been shown already that articles published as OA-variants

are more visible, leading to higher citation counts and altmetrics (Evans &

Reimer, 2009; Fraser, Momeni, Mayr, & Peters, 2020; Lewis, 2018; McKier-

nan et al., 2016; Ottaviani, 2016). Moreover, the Matthew eﬀect shows that

researchers who are already well-known and widely cited receive even more

citations (Farys & Wolbring, 2021) – which directly aﬀects rewards for publi-

cation in prestigious journals, for prominence, and citations. For researchers,

publications play a central role in their daily practice and the reputation sys-

tem in which they operate. Publications enable researchers to build on the

body of knowledge and refer to those ﬁndings by citing the publications (which

accumulate reputation in this way). Hence, access to publications is crucial for

the progress of science and building of reputation – which both can be impeded

by a lack of access to OA publishing options and the risk of CA-articles not

being cited as frequently as OA articles.

From that, we hypothesize that researchers with better access to ﬁnancial

resources have better access to publications – both in terms of access to read

openly and in terms of access to publish openly. Associated with that may

be an even stronger citation advantage for those researchers (usually WEIRD:

Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic; (Henrich, Heine, &

Norenzayan, 2010)) with extensive OA-publishing options. As such, OA may

carry the risk of perpetuating already existing inequalities rather than resolv-

ing such marginalization in the scholarly communication system (Fox et al.,

2021).



***

4

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

2 Related work


## Related work also indicates a strong association between economic factors,


OA, and citation advantages. The scientiﬁc output of countries is associated

with their economic evolution because scientiﬁc progress needs governments’

ﬁnancial support. Samimi (2011) used a Granger Causality Test to examine

the causal relationship between scientiﬁc output and GDP in 176 countries and

found a two-way positive relationship between them. King (2004) compared

published papers and their citation impacts across countries and found that

only 31 countries contributed to 98% of the world’s highly cited papers and

that the remaining 161 countries contributed less than 2%.

Open Access publishing is also highly inﬂuenced by the authors’ country

of aﬃliation since it determines APC waiver/discount policies or the avail-

ability of transformative agreements with publishers. Some publishers oﬀer

general waivers or have a discount policy for all of their journals for eligible

authors, and the country’s income level mainly determines eligibility. Lawson

(2015) has studied the waiver policy of the 32 most prominent publishers and

found that 68% of them grant APC waivers. Simard et al. (2021) found that

low-income countries publish and cite OA more than upper-middle and high-

income countries. The positive correlation between OA citing and publishing

is 1.3 times weaker for high-income countries than other countries. Similarly,

Iyandemye and Thomas (2019) showed that biomedicine researchers from low-

income countries have the highest percentage in OA publishing. Smith et al.

(2022) reported the proportionately fewer OA articles published in Elsevier’s

journals for low-income countries, despite their eligibility for APC waivers.

Olejniczak and Wilson (2020) studied the articles published by faculty

members at research universities in the United States and found that in the

United States, male and senior authors are more likely to publish in OA

form. Zhu (2017) conducted a survey with over 1800 researchers at 12 Russell

Group universities1 to ﬁnd the diﬀerences in OA publishing regarding disci-

pline, seniority, and gender. Their results revealed disciplinary diﬀerences in

OA publishing (Medical and Life Scientists are most likely to publish in Gold

OA journals), more tendency toward OA publishing for senior authors, and

across genders for men.

The journal rank is a decisive factor in submitting the article in addition to

its business model. Schroter, Tite, and Smith (2005) conducted a survey study

with 28 international authors who submitted to the BMJ and found that for

authors, the journal’s ranking is more important than the availability of OA.

Many studies have investigated the OA citation outcome, and most found a

citation advantage for OA articles (Evans & Reimer, 2009; Fraser et al., 2020;

Lewis, 2018; McKiernan et al., 2016; Ottaviani, 2016). However, regarding

biases (e.g., quality bias, self-selecting, mandating, self-archiving), diﬀerent

sampling and controlling data makes it diﬃcult to conclude that receiving more

citations is only the eﬀect of OA. Momeni, Mayr, Fraser, and Peters (2021)

1https://russellgroup.ac.uk/about/our-universities/



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

studied the citation impact of ﬂipping journals from CA to OA and generally

found a slightly higher growth in receiving citations compared to journals in

the same discipline and the impact factor’s range. However, they didn’t observe

this trend in all scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Momeni, Mayr, and Dietze (2022) examined

the correlation between diﬀerent factors and the future authors’ h-index and

found a positive but weak correlation coeﬃcient between them.

One issue which is often discussed together with OA publishing and APCs

is the problem of predatory publishing. Predatory publishers take advantage of

the OA movement but work against the good scientiﬁc practice. Ross-Hellauer

et al. (2021) did a systematic review to study the threat to equity in science

via open science implementations. They concluded that less well-resourced

researchers, researchers from non-English-speaking countries, and early-career

researchers are particularly aﬀected by the ‘predatory publishing’ problem.

3 Research questions

We conduct our study on the association between publishing models, the

economic background of researchers, and other author-speciﬁc and structural

factors along three major research questions:

RQ1: What is the relationship between the income level of researchers’

aﬃliation countries and their publication behavior (do they prefer OA or CA)?

RQ2: What is the relationship between the income level of researchers’

aﬃliation countries and their publication behavior (OA or CA) with their

citation impact?

To answer these questions, we categorize corresponding authors based on

the income level of their aﬃliation country and compare the access status of

articles they have published and their citation impact. Whereas the ﬁrst two

RQs are rather descriptive and aim at quantifying the extent to which access

to publish openly and access to read openly (and along with it to make them

easier/more likely to cite) are related to the economic background of authors,

the third RQ takes a variety of factors into account that have been shown to

be strongly associated with tendencies to publish OA (Iyandemye & Thomas,

2019; Olejniczak & Wilson, 2020; Simard et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Zhu,

2017).

RQ3: What factors (e.g., journals, articles, authors, or their countries) are

associated with selecting the business model of publications (OA against CA)?

Here we aim to give a detailed view of associating factors with OA pub-

lishing using correlation, regression and machine learning analyses. To this

end, structural features, such as APC waivers, are considered besides author-

speciﬁc properties, such as gender or years of publishing activity (see Table

2). We will also look closely at the diﬀerent access forms to publications such

as Gold OA, Hybrid, and Closed Access. Concerning the level of journals, the

relationships between journal rankings, APCs, and research ﬁelds (Health Sci-

ences, Life Sciences, Physical Sciences, Social Sciences, and multiple ﬁelds) will

be examined. In addition, possible country-related inﬂuencing factors will be



***

6

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

investigated, such as countries’ income level, transformation agreements’ exis-

tence, or opportunities for researchers to obtain APC discounts or waivers. At

the journal article level, the ratio of OA to CA citations in an article and the

number of authors involved are examined. Other author-speciﬁc inﬂuencing

factors can be gender and age, the ratio of OA to CA publications in the past,

or even the proportion of international co-authors.

4 Data and methodology

To conduct our study, information on the business model, author character-

istics, and article impact are needed, and several approaches and databases

must be linked to receive a complete dataset.

4.1 Data selection

For the business model of journals (OA, Hybrid, CA) it is possible to crawl

the information from the journal’s or publisher’s website or to look up sources

such as the Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) and Unpaywall, which

both include OA information. But information about the history of the busi-

ness model of journals is rarely available. In recent years, many journals have

converted (ﬂipped) from closed access to open access and vice versa, but often

there is not enough information about the exact date of starting with the

new access model. The Open Access Directory (OAD), a wiki hosted by the

School of Library and Information Science at Simmons University2, is the only

resource containing a list of a few ﬂipped journals and the date of ﬂipping.

The open-access start date of journals was available in the DOAJ dataset

until 2020. Bautista-Puig, Lopez-Illescas, de Moya-Anegon, Guerrero-Bote,

and Moed (2020) and Momeni et al. (2021) used OAD and DOAJ for their

studies about ﬂipping journals. Unfortunately, DOAJ stopped collecting that

information by now: ”As time progressed, open access models became more

complicated ... It has become harder to ﬁnd the right answer to that seem-

ingly simple question: when did open access start for this journal?”3. Matthias,

Jahn, and Laakso (2019) employed diﬀerent snapshots of datasets that have

the open access status (Scopus, DOAJ, Ulrichsweb, publishers’ website, etc.)

and some other resources to ﬁnd out the reverse ﬂip (converting from OA back

to CA) and veriﬁed them manually. For the bibliometric analyses related to

open access, it is necessary to know about the access status of journals for

the period in which we study the eﬀect of OA. Obtaining information more

coherently requires looking into diﬀerent journals’ business models and har-

monizing them to make them comparable. In addition, every publisher has its

own rules for APC exemptions to foster publishing in OA format. For example,

eligibility for APC waivers for publishing in Elsevier’s journals is based on the

2http://oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Main Page

3https://blog.doaj.org/2021/02/05/why-did-we-stop-collecting-and-showing-the-open-access-

start-date-for-journals/



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

’Research4Life program’4 and for Springer Nature based on ’World bank clas-

siﬁcation’. Various transformative agreements with publishers and the period

of their contracts are other inﬂuential factors that should be considered in

studying the publishing behavior of each publisher separately.

Due to these varying APC-related rules for diﬀerent publishers, we focused

on one major publisher. To analyse papers for various disciplines and countries,

we chose Springer Nature, the largest publisher of academic journals (more

than 2,900 journals5) with worldwide authors from various disciplines, which

provides us with a large amount of data and data diversity for more accurate


## results. Also, compared to Elsevier, the second most prominent publisher of


scholarly journals (above 2,700 journals 6), this publisher has a higher OA

update (Sotudeh, Ghasempour, & Yaghtin, 2015; Sullo, 2016), resulting in

fewer data skewness.

We downloaded the list of journals and their access status from the snap-

shot from the year 2019 which is available on the publisher’s website7. Three

publishing models exist for these Springer Nature (SN) journals: Gold Open

Access, Hybrid (with the open access option: Open Choice), and Closed Access.

Figure 1 displays the distribution of journals and their publishing models.

Fig. 1 Distribution of Springer Nature’s journals by (a) publishing model and (b) ﬁeld and

publishing model.

For the bibliometric analyses, we employed Scopus8. We matched the list of

SN journals with journals in Scopus via title and ISSN. From 3,138 SN journals,

we could match 2,757 journals, which we used for further analyses. Because

of the problems regarding journals’ ﬂipping mentioned above, we limited our


## data to two years, 2017 and 2018, to reduce the errors related to detecting the


journals’ and articles’ business model. It resulted in 522,411 articles.

4https://www.research4life.org/access/eligibility/

5https://www.springernature.com/gp/librarians/products/journals/springer-journals

6https://www.elsevier.com/about/this-is-elsevier

7https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/journals-books/journals

8The in-house Scopus database maintained by the German Competence Centre for Bibliometrics

(Scopus-KB), 2021 version



***

8

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

To detect the publishing model of articles in hybrid journals, we employed

Unpaywall9 (the snapshot of 2019), a service to ﬁnd the available version of

articles. From metadata in this dataset, we can obtain the publishing model

of articles in hybrid journals.

We obtained the APC amount in dollars for 1,741 hybrid journals and 297

gold OA journals from the website of Springer Nature10. There was no ﬁxed

APC for 147 gold OA journals (only 5% of investigated articles belong to these

journals), and we had to visit their website to obtain the exact amount for

these journals. Therefore we replaced the APC amount for these journals with

null values (empty) and excluded them from the data for the classiﬁcation task.

To detect the gender status of authors, we utilized a combined name and

image-based approach introduced by Karimi, Wagner, Lemmerich, Jadidi, and

Strohmaier (2016), which categorizes the gender into male and female. Based

on this method, we tried to detect the gender using the API Genderize.io


## 11. For those names that the API couldn’t identify the gender, we looked for


names on the web and detected their gender using image-based recognition

algorithms which increases the recall and accuracy compared to Genderize.io

(Karimi et al., 2016). We acknowledge that the person’s gender is not a binary

variable. Considering the social dimensions, more gender identities could not

be identiﬁed with this approach and that is left out for the analysis. Using

Scopus author ID, we found 381,074 unique corresponding authors for the

investigated articles, and 10,614 authors (about 3%) had only initials or no

ﬁrst name, and we couldn’t detect their gender.

Overall, we identiﬁed the gender status for 49% of them. Therefore, we

excluded 254,044 articles (about 49%) that we couldn’t detect the gender sta-

tus of their corresponding author from data in the regression analysis and

classiﬁcation task. One possible reason for a low rate of identifying gender

is the large percentage of authors aﬃliated with Asian countries (136,591

above 35%)12 and probably originally from these countries. Previous studies

tested gender detection tools for authors with diﬀerent nationalities and found

them to be less eﬀective for Asian names (Karimi et al., 2016; Santamar´ıa

& Mihaljevi´c, 2018). Table 1 shows the number and percentage of OA and

CA publications belonging to the corresponding authors with a gender status

across scientiﬁc ﬁelds. The percentage of detected gender of authors for OA

publications is 4% more than for CA publications.

4.2 Features and deﬁnitions

To investigate the factors that are associated with higher rates of OA pub-

lishing, we deﬁned some features presented in Table 2. Figure 3 presents an

9https://unpaywall.org/

10https://www.springernature.com/de/open-research/journals-books/journals

11https://genderize.io/

12Authors from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkey, which belong

to both Asia and Europe, are not included in this list.



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Table 1 Number and proportion of articles among scientiﬁc ﬁelds and publishing model

that we detected the gender status of their corresponding author.

Publishing Model

CA model (percentage)

OA model (percentage)

Health Sciences

31,642 (53%)

20,534 (49%)

Life Sciences

23,011 (54%)

10,032 (57%)

Physical Sciences

74,742 (48%)

9,927 (50%)

Social Sciences

9,210 (40%)

2,020 (41%)

Multiple ﬁelds

38,507 (52%)

48,742 (58%)

Total

177,112 (50%)

91,255 (54%)

overview of data collection and preparation steps. The ﬁnal analysed data is

available on Git repository 13.

To compare the publishing and citation behavior across countries, we

classiﬁed countries by income based on the World Bank classiﬁcation14 into

four groups: low, lower-middle, upper-middle and high-income economies. The

income level of a country has been evaluated every year and its history is

available15. From 218 listed countries by the World Bank, we excluded 20 coun-

tries with diﬀerent income levels from 2015 to 2018. Springer Nature oﬀers

APC waiver and discount to those articles with the corresponding author

from low and lower-middle-income countries (classiﬁed by the World Bank),

respectively16.

From the website Transformative Agreement Registry provided by ESAC17

we found three organizations with an open access agreement with this pub-

lisher during the investigated years 2017 and 2018 (KEMOE/FWF in Austria,

Max Planck Society in Germany and Bibsam consortium in Sweden) and two

organizations (VSNU-UKB in Netherlands and FinELib consortium in Fin-

land) in 2018. We obtained the list of involved institutions in the agreement by

asking KEMOE/FWF, Bibsam, and FinELib organizations. The list of par-

ticipating institutions via VSNU-UK was available on the website of SN 18.

We assumed that the publications with the corresponding author aﬃliated

with institutions included in the transformative agreement are free of APC

charges. To ﬁnd Max Planck institutions, we used disambiguated institutional

addresses for German institutions (Rimmert, Schwechheimer, & Winterhager,


## 2017) available on Scopus-KB. We manually looked up the participating insti-


tutions for the rest of the four countries. Altogether, we found 12,323 articles

and used them to set the feature ’OA agreement’ value.

Figure 2 represents the number of articles published in Springer Nature

in which their corresponding author is aﬃliated with a country with the

respective income group. Sixty-seven articles had a corresponding author

13https://github.com/momeniﬁ/open access springer nature

14https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-

and-lending-groups

15http://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/site-content/OGHIST.xlsx

16https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/journal-policies/apc-waiver-

countries

17https://esac-initiative.org/about/transformative-agreements/agreement-registry/

18https://resource-cms.springernature.com/springer-cms/rest/v1/content/19371608/data/v3



***

10

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

with multiple aﬃliation countries and we excluded them from the analyses.

Publication distribution by countries and their income level is available on

GitHub19.

Fig. 2 Number of papers published by Springer Nature grouped by income level of

countries.

To obtain the ratio of authors’ previous OA publications, we needed to

identify authors and their publications. Scopus Author Id enabled us to get

each author’s list of published articles. For the variable Country income, we

consider average GDP per capita in the years 2017 and 2018 obtained from

the world bank group20. We used the year of the ﬁrst publication of authors

indexed in Scopus to calculate their career age as a measurement of seniority.

To evaluate the quality of journals and rank them, we employed the

journal’s H-index, which Hodge and Lacasse (2011) suggested as a better mea-

surement for ranking journals than the 5-year impact factor in social science

and that has been used in previous studies (Barner, Holosko, & Thyer, 2014;

Xia, 2012). We calculated the H-index of all journals in Scopus classiﬁed in 27

subject categories21 within the years 2011 and 2016.

4.3 Methodology

4.3.1 Normalizing the citation impact

To evaluate and compare the citation impact at the article and journal level

among diﬀerent subject areas, we should normalize them because of varying

citation patterns across scientiﬁc disciplines and ﬁelds. To normalize the jour-

nal’s H-index across categories, we computed the Percentile Rank (PR) of each

journal (inspired by Bornmann and Mutz (2014)) in its category. This method

gives the journals within a category a rank between 0 (lowest H-index) to 100

(highest H-index). In this approach, journals with the same H-index have the

19https://github.com/momeniﬁ/open access springer nature/blob/main/publications country distribution.csv

20https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD

21https://service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a id/14882/supporthub/scopus/related/1/



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Table 2 Features used to study the associated factors with OA publishing.

Feature

type

Feature

Description

journal ranking

H-index ranking of the journal in the related discipline

(for multidisciplinary journals, the average ranking among

disciplines).

journal APC

The cost of APC to publish OA in the journal (US-Dollar).

ﬁeld

Field of journal (If the journal has more than one ﬁeld,

the value is ’multiple ﬁelds’).

Health Sciences

Life Sciences

Physical Sciences

Social Sciences

multiple ﬁelds

Journal

country income

Income level (GDP per capita) of the country in which the

corresponding author is aﬃliated.

OA agreement

If the corresponding author’s country of aﬃliation has an

OA agreement with the publisher, it equals 1, otherwise 0.

discount eligible

If the corresponding author’s country of aﬃliation belongs

to the lower-middle income group, it equals 1, otherwise 0.

waiver eligible

If the corresponding author’s country of aﬃliation belongs

to the low-income group, it equals 1, otherwise 0.

Country

Paper

OA cite

ratio of citing OA against CA in this paper

authors count

number of authors

gender

for females equals 1 and for male 0.

age

years since ﬁrst publication

OA publish

ratio of OA publications against CA in the past (number

of previous OA publications divided by the number of CA

publications)

international coauthors

proportion of international co-authors** to all co-authors

in this paper

* Corresponding author

** An international co-author is a co-author who has a diﬀerent aﬃliation country than the

corresponding author.

Author*

same rank. Therefore, this normalization method is an advantage in case of

skewed distributions. If the journal belongs to more than one category, we

used the weighted PR (Bornmann & Williams, 2020). Based on this approach,

weighted PR (wPR) will be calculated using the formula:

wPR = PRsc1 ∗nsc1 + PRsc2 ∗nsc2 + ... + PRsci ∗nsci

nsc1 + nsc2 + ... + nsci

(1)

whereby, sci is the ith subject category that the journal belongs to and

nsci is the number of journals in this subject category, and PRsci is PR of the

journal in it.

To present the citation impact of articles, we employed a similar nor-

malizing approach. Because the citation count is confounded by time since

publication, we consider the citations during a time window of two years since

the publication, as in previous studies (Jannot, Agoritsas, Gayet-Ageron, &

Perneger, 2013; Piwowar et al., 2018). Next, we categorized the articles into

groups with the same subject category and publishing year and ranked them



***

12

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Fig. 3 Flow chart of data collection and preparation process.

from 0 to 100 based on received citations. We deﬁne a percentile rank of 50

(citation’s median) as a threshold for highly cited articles. An article is highly

cited if its rank is above 50% of PR in its group, meaning that it has received

more citations than half of the articles in the same subject category and pub-

lishing year. For articles belonging to multiple subject categories, we used wPR



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

mentioned in Equation 1, where sci is the ith subject category of the article

and nsci is the number of articles in this subject category, and PRsci is PR of

the article in it.

4.3.2 Correlation analysis

To ﬁnd the association between OA publishing and any feature deﬁned in

Table 2 we conducted a correlation analysis. The ﬁrst variable in calculating

the correlation is OA publishing, a dichotomous variable (a case of categorical

variable). To assess the association with ﬁeld, which is a categorical variable,

we selected Cramer’s V coeﬃcient. Cramer’s V is based on the chi-squared

test and measures the strength of association between two variables. Its value

ranges from 0 (no association) to 1 (complete association). The association

with binary variables (OA agreement, discount eligible, waiver eligible, gen-

der) was examined with Phi coeﬃcient (Ekstr¨om, 2011). This correlation

coeﬃcient ranges from -1 to +1 and shows the strength of the positive or nega-

tive correlation between two dichotomous variables. To measure the association

with other numerical or continuous variables, we applied the Point-Biserial

Correlation Coeﬃcient, which is used instead of the Pearson correlation when

a variable is dichotomous (LeBlanc & Cox, 2017) and can range from -1 to +1.

4.3.3 Regression analysis

We used multivariate logistic regression to ﬁnd the relationship between vari-

ous variables (deﬁned in Table2) and OA publishing. It is a common method

for modeling the relationship between the dichotomous dependent variable and

multiple independent variables. It allows us to understand the association of

the dependent variable with an independent variable in the presence of other

independent variables in the data.

4.3.4 Classiﬁcation method

We employed a machine learning method to estimate the likelihood of choos-

ing the publishing model. To this end, we categorized the publishing model of

articles into two groups, OA and CA. Then, we utilized the value of deﬁned fea-

tures in Table 2 to predict the publishing model. This process is a classiﬁcation

task in machine learning.

To estimate the publishing model of articles, we use a supervised machine

learning method, random forest (RF), which is a common tool for classiﬁca-

tion tasks (Behr, Giese, Theune, et al., 2020; Kumar, Mukhopadhyay, Gupta,

Handa, & Shukla, 2019; Roy, Chopra, Lee, Spampinato, & Mohammadi-

ivatlood, 2020; Yamak, Saunier, & Vercouter, 2016). We utilize this tool for

binary classiﬁcation (OA=1 or CA=0) and use the features introduced in Table

2 as independent variables. We implement the algorithm for hybrid journals

in which authors can choose their paper’s business model. We used k-Fold

cross-validation (k=10) procedure to train and test the model.



***

14

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Due to the skewed distribution in the target variable (91% CA and 9%

OA publishing), we balance them by re-sampling data via SMOTE (Synthetic

Minority Over-sampling Technique), which was proven to be a suitable method

to handle a class imbalance problem (Spelmen & Porkodi, 2018).

5 Results

In this section, ﬁrst, we present some descriptive statistics about the publishing

model of articles across four country groups and address RQ1. Next, we display

their diﬀerences in terms of citation impact among diﬀerent models to answer

RQ2. Then we focus on RQ3 and present the correlation coeﬃcient between

the publishing model and features deﬁned in Table 2 and multivariate logistic

regression to show the relationship between variables. Also, we demonstrate the

performance of estimating the publishing model of articles in hybrid journals

and the importance of deﬁned features in the estimation task to reveal the

inﬂuential factors in selecting the OA model for publishing.

5.1 Countries’ income level of corresponding authors and

their publishing model

Figure 4 shows the distribution of articles categorized by publishing model and

the country income level of the corresponding authors. Authors with aﬃliations

in countries with the lowest income level and who are eligible for the APC

waiver have the highest proportion of gold OA publications. In contrast to

this, authors from lower-middle-income countries who are eligible for the APC

discount have the lowest percentage in gold OA publishing.

Fig. 4 Distribution of articles published in journals with three publishing models across four

groups of countries. The access status of hybrid articles has been identiﬁed from Unpaywall

(cases 2 and 3). For case 4 (Hybrid, no access status), we couldn’t ﬁnd hybrid journals’

articles in Unpaywall.



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

5.2 Countries’ income level of corresponding authors and

their citation impact

Figure 5 shows the ratio of highly cited articles for the investigated articles

with diﬀerent publishing models across country groups. Generally, we observe

a higher percentage of highly cited papers for corresponding authors from

countries with higher income levels.

The ratio of highly cited articles among all countries for gold and hybrid

OA models is higher than in other models. Also, this ratio is higher for gold OA

articles and indicates the better citation impact of articles published in gold

OA journals. The only exception is for countries with low-income levels, with

more highly cited papers in the hybrid OA model. Compared to CA journals,

journals in hybrid CA have more highly cited articles except for countries with

a high-income level.

Fig. 5 Percentage of highly cited papers published in diﬀerent models. Hybrid Open Access

/ Closed Access belong to articles published as OA/CA in hybrid journals.

5.3 Inﬂuential factors on the publishing model

First, we conducted a correlation analysis to ﬁnd the associations between OA

publishing and features. Table 3 shows the correlation coeﬃcient between the

publishing model (if open access is equal to 1 otherwise 0) and features in Table


## 2. We separated the data into two sets, set 1 for articles published in OA or


CA journals (non-hybrid journals) and set 2 for articles in hybrid journals. Set

1 reveals the association of discount and waiver policies with OA publishing,

while optional OA publishing for hybrid journals in set 2 displays more author-

speciﬁc factors related to OA publishing. The weak negative correlation with

gender demonstrates that the tendency toward gold OA publishing for women

is slightly more than for men, which disagrees with previous ﬁndings (Ole-

jniczak & Wilson, 2020; Zhu, 2017). As we observed the lowest proportion of

OA publishing for countries with a lower-middle-income level in Figure 4, the

negative correlation for discount eligible (also positive value for waiver eligible)

in Table 3 points out that the discount policies are insuﬃcient to motivate the



***

16

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

authors from these countries for gold OA publishing. Table 4 displays the rela-

tionship between the publishing model and features in Table 3 by considering

all features in multivariate logistic regression. The results conﬁrm the nega-

tive/ positive correlation calculated in correlation analysis, except the positive

correlation between discount eligible and the publishing model is inconsistent

with the result in the correlation coeﬃcient. The highest Odds Ratios for

Social Sciences among ﬁelds in Table 4 reveal the highest proportion of OA

publishing in this ﬁeld. This ﬁeld has experienced a dramatic growth of OA

journals since 2009 Liu and Li (2018). The strong positive correlation between

journal ranking and the publishing model for the ﬁrst set suggests that the

journal’s rank is the dominant factor in choosing a gold OA journal to pub-

lish. Therefore, we estimate the publishing model for articles in set 2 (hybrid

journals) to discover other feature categories rather than journal-speciﬁc fac-

tors inﬂuencing the authors’ decision for an OA option. Moreover, the optional

choice of the OA model in hybrid journals better reveals characteristics leading

to the OA model.

Table 3 Correlation coeﬃcient between independent variables and the target variable.

The value of the target equal to 1 (0) means the paper has been published in the OA (CA)

model.

Correlation Coeﬃcient

Feature

Correlation Test

Set 1 (non-hybrid)

Set 2 (hybrid)

journal ranking

Point-Biserial

0.70

0.07

journal APC

Point-Biserial

-

0.10

ﬁeld

Cramer’s V

0.69

0.09

country income

Point-Biserial

0.28

0.16

OA agreement

Phi

0.08

0.30

discount eligible

Phi

-0.08

-

waiver eligible

Phi

0.06

-

OA cite

Point-Biserial

0.42

0.13

authors count

Point-Biserial

0.09

0.07

gender

Phi

-0.08

-0.01

age

Point-Biserial

-0.08

0.02

OA publish

Point-Biserial

0.46

0.41

international coauthors

Point-Biserial

0.17

0.11

Sample Size:

192,498

329,913

Table 5 shows the performance of the RF classiﬁer for the second set (hybrid

journals). Figure 6 displays the permutation importance of features employed

to predict the publishing model implemented for this set. The permutation

importance of a feature shows a decrease in the model performance when the

feature’s value is randomly shuﬄed while the values of other predictors remain

unchanged. A higher value for a feature shows more predictive power in the

proposed model. The highest importance values for country income, and age

in Figure 6 indicate that the most signiﬁcant factors in selecting an OA model

are the income level of countries and seniority. The lowest value for the variable

gender presents that gender has a lower impact on the authors’ decision for

the OA model compared to other factors. OA agreement is one of the weakest



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Table 4 The results of Logistic regression. The target variable is the publishing model

and is equal to 1 for OA and 0 for CA publishing. The outputs are Odds Ratio, exp(β).

(1-exp(β)) shows the percentage change of the target variable per unit increase in an

independent variable. So, the Odds Ratio greater/less than one displays a

positive/negative correlation between variables.

Set 1

Set 2

Odds Ratio

95% CI

Odds Ratio

95% CI

Intercept

0.002∗∗∗(-72.4)

0.001 to 0.002

0.00∗∗∗(-87.7)

0.00 to 0.00

Independent Variables

journal ranking

1.98∗∗∗(10.38)

1.74 to 2.25

110.7∗∗∗(86.5)

99.5 to 100.23

journal APC

1.00∗∗∗(8.05)

1.0001 to 1.0002

-

-

ﬁeld

Health Sciences


## reference



## reference



## reference



## reference


Life Sciences

1.01(0.31)

0.94 to 1.08

0.67∗∗∗(-9.55)

0.62 to 0.73

Physical Sciences

0.97(-0.91)

0.91 to 1.07

0.20∗∗∗(-44.29)

0.18 to 0.21

Social Sciences

1.90∗∗∗(13.81)

1.73 to 2.08

3.49∗∗∗(12.2)

2.86 to 4.27

multiple ﬁelds

1.25∗∗∗(8.5)

1.19 to 1.32

3.4∗∗∗(30.87)

3.17 to 3.71

country income

1.00∗∗∗(33.88)

1.000 to 1.000

1.000∗∗∗(16.18)

1.00 to 1.00

OA agreement

14.9∗∗∗(65.07)

13.78 to 16.22

0.93(-0.78)

0.78 to 1.11

discount eligible

-

-

1.7∗∗∗(9.17)

1.52 to 1.90

waiver eligible

-

-

20.19∗∗∗(5.53)

8.29 to 77.5

OA cite

0.55∗∗∗(-12.97)

0.500 to 0.600

1.55∗∗∗(8.4)

1.39 to 1.71

authors count

1.003(0.80)

0.99 to 1.01

1.17∗∗∗(33.15)

1.16 to 1.18

gender

0.94∗∗(-2.8)

0.90 to 0.98

0.93∗(-2.5)

0.88 to 0.98

age

1.05∗∗∗(29.63)

1.05 to 1.1.054

0.97∗∗∗(-15.36)

0.96 to 0.98

OA publish

196.79∗∗∗(105.65)

178.46 to 217.09

23.86∗∗∗(50.58)

21.1 to 26.99

international coauthors

1.17∗∗∗(18.21)

1.15 to 1.19

1.03(1.34)

0.99 to 1.06

McFadden’s Pseudo R2

0.25

0.60

Sample Size

96,674

162,773

signiﬁcant codes: . p < 0.1, ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001

z-values of coeﬃcients in parentheses

CI: Conﬁdence Interval

Table 5 performance of predicting the publishing model of papers with random forest


## method.


Classiﬁcation

OA

CA

Precision

0.85

0.94

Recall

0.95

0.83

F1score

0.89

0.88

Accuracy

0.92

features in predicting the publishing model, and the correlation analysis also

shows a weak correlation between them. One possible reason for the weak eﬀect

is that only 2.3% of papers have been involved in transformative agreements.

In addition, the income level of countries is the most important feature, and

regarding the positive correlation of this feature with OA publishing, it is more

likely for authors from high-income countries (even without a transformative

agreement) to publish in the OA model. This may also smooth the association

of the agreement with OA publishing.

6 Conclusion and discussion

This work presents a detailed study of the relationship between author-speciﬁc

and structural factors (e.g., income level of authors’ aﬃliation country), OA

publishing, and OA citation advantage. First, we investigated the relationship



***

18

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Fig. 6 Permutation importance of features employed to predict the publishing model of

papers with random forest method for the articles published in hybrid journals.

between the income level of countries and OA publishing for articles published

by Springer Nature in the years 2017 and 2018. We found that authors from

lower-middle-income countries with the eligibility to use APC discounts have

a lower proportion of gold OA publications in all published papers by this

publisher compared to other countries. It indicates that discounted APC is still

too much for these authors to pay for a gold OA model and agrees with the

statement of (Rouhi et al., 2022), who pointed out that waiver and discount

issues couldn’t bring author equity in reading and publishing. In contrast,

this proportion of authors from countries with a low-income level who receive

APC waivers is higher than authors from other countries. This result conﬂicts

with the study’s results by Smith et al. (2022), which found fewer OA papers

proportions published by Elsevier for these countries compared to others. The

reason can be stricter conditions, which this publisher considers for waiver

eligibility.

We examined the citation impact of these articles and compared the per-

centage of highly cited papers among the publishing models and the income

levels of the corresponding authors’ countries. For all countries, the OA model

in gold OA or hybrid has the highest percentage of highly cited papers. Also,

the results demonstrate a higher proportion of highly cited articles for coun-

tries with higher income levels. Although it displays more citation impact for

OA models, it can result from confounding factors such as self-selection and

quality biases (Gargouri et al., 2010). Also, examining the preprint and green

OA publishing (if the article has been published in the CA model, but a free

version is available in a repository outside of the publisher’s website) eﬀect will


## result in more accurate analyses (Fraser et al., 2020; Wang, Gl¨anzel, & Chen,


2020).

To ﬁnd more characteristics (e.g., author, journal, paper) related to

OA publishing, we conducted correlation, regression, and machine learning

analyses. The results of the correlation analysis displayed the strength of pos-

itive/negative correlation between the publishing model and every feature



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

deﬁned in Table 2. Using regression analysis, we examined the association

of each factor while accounting for other factors. The results reinforced the

correlation outcomes. The only conﬂict between these two methods was the

negative correlation between discount egibility with OA publishing in correla-

tion analysis, but positive in regression evaluation. In addition, we estimated

the publishing model of articles (OA or CA) using a random forest-based

machine learning approach and examined the impact of each feature on the

estimation task. The results show that the country’s income and more expe-

riences in OA rather than CA publishing are the most inﬂuential factors in

estimating the publishing model. We discovered that the tendency toward OA

publishing was slightly higher for women, but it was a less important feature

than other features in estimating the OA model.

7 Limitations and future work

One obvious limitation of this study is that we included articles from just one

publisher, Springer Nature. Authors’ publishing behavior may diﬀer among

articles published by other publishers, which limits the generalizability of the


## results of our study.


We obtained the access status of journals in 2019 based on the list pub-

lished on Springer Nature’s website (the same for the access status at the

article level from Unpaywall). Some journals may have ﬂipped from CA to OA

(Momeni et al., 2021) or vice versa, and we did not detect them, which can

cause errors in results. Furthermore, we did not control the correctness of exter-

nal data (Springer nature and Unpaywall). The accuracy of these data aﬀects

the results’ precision. We identiﬁed the gender of 49% authors and removed

49% of articles without gender status corresponding authors in regression and

machine learning analyses. In addition, 2% of the data have been removed

because of the null value in other features (e.g., journals’ APC). Because the

gender detection approach doesn’t work well for Asian names, especially Chi-

nese ones, we have a lower proportion of these authors with gender status in

the dataset, which also creates biases in our analyses.

For future work, we can consider other publishers to examine how the diﬀer-

ent APC policies among publishers impact OA publishing. Also, controlling for

articles’ language in the analyses encourages future studies. Springer Nature

is an international publisher and publishes mostly articles in English22, and

articles in other languages are underrepresented in this study. considering other

publishers with non-English content and the articles’ language in the analyses

can reveal the role of languages in publishing international OA articles and

citation advantages.

22https://support.springernature.com/en/support/solutions/articles/6000219817-are-any-of-

your-titles-available-in-other-languages-



***

20

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

8 Declarations

Author contributions

Fakhri Momeni: Conceptualization; Methodology; Software; Validation; For-

mal analysis; Investigation; Resources; Writing - Original Draft; Writing -

Review & Editing; Visualization.

Kristin Biesenbender: Conceptualization; Resources; Writing - Review &

Editing.

Philipp Mayr: Writing - Review & Editing; Project administration; Funding

acquisition.

Stefan Dietze: Supervision; Methodology; Writing - Review & Editing

Isabella Peters: Supervision; Writing - Review & Editing; Project adminis-

tration; Funding acquisition;

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Availability of data and materials

The dataset analysed during the current study and codes are available on the

https://github.com/momeniﬁ/open access springer nature.git.

Acknowledgements

This work is ﬁnancially supported by BMBF project OASE, grant number

01PU17005A. We acknowledge the support of the German Competence Center

for Bibliometrics (grant: 01PQ17001) for maintaining the used dataset for the

analyses.


## References


Bahlai, C., Bartlett, L.J., Burgio, K.R., Fournier, A.M., Keiser, C.N., Poisot,

T., Whitney, K.S. (2019). Open science isn’t always open to all scientists.

American Scientist, 107(2), 78–82.

Barner, J.R., Holosko, M.J., Thyer, B.A. (2014). American social work and

psychology faculty members’ scholarly productivity: A controlled com-

parison of citation impact using the h-index.

The British Journal of

Social Work, 44(8), 2448–2458.

Bautista-Puig, N., Lopez-Illescas, C., de Moya-Anegon, F., Guerrero-Bote, V.,

Moed, H.F. (2020). Do journals ﬂipping to gold open access show an oa

citation or publication advantage? Scientometrics, 124(3), 2551–2575.



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Behr, A., Giese, M., Theune, K., et al. (2020). Early prediction of university

dropouts–a random forest approach. Jahrb¨ucher f¨ur National¨okonomie

und Statistik, 240(6), 743–789.

Bornmann, L., & Mutz, R.

(2014).

From p100 to p100’: A new citation-

rank approach. Journal of the Association for Information Science and

Technology, 65(9), 1939–1943.

Bornmann, L., & Williams, R. (2020). An evaluation of percentile measures of

citation impact, and a proposal for making them better. Scientometrics,

124(2), 1457–1478.

Ekstr¨om, J. (2011). The phi-coeﬃcient, the tetrachoric correlation coeﬃcient,

and the pearson-yule debate.

Evans, J.A., & Reimer, J. (2009). Open access and global participation in

science. Science, 323(5917), 1025–1025.

Farys, R., & Wolbring, T. (2021). Matthew eﬀects in science and the serial

diﬀusion of ideas: Testing old ideas with new methods.

Quantitative

Science Studies, 2(2), 505–526.

Fox, J., Pearce, K.E., Massanari, A.L., Riles, J.M., Szulc,  L., Ranjit, Y.S.,

. . . others (2021). Open science, closed doors? countering marginaliza-

tion through an agenda for ethical, inclusive research in communication.

Journal of Communication, 71(5), 764–784.

Fraser, N., Momeni, F., Mayr, P., Peters, I. (2020). The relationship between

biorxiv preprints, citations and altmetrics. Quantitative Science Studies,

1(2), 618–638.

Gargouri, Y., Hajjem, C., Larivi`ere, V., Gingras, Y., Carr, L., Brody, T., Har-

nad, S. (2010). Self-selected or mandated, open access increases citation

impact for higher quality research. PloS one, 5(10), e13636.

Henrich, J., Heine, S.J., Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the

world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(2-3), 61–83.



***

22

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Hodge, D.R., & Lacasse, J.R. (2011). Evaluating journal quality: Is the h-

index a better measure than impact factors? Research on Social Work

Practice, 21(2), 222–230.

Iyandemye, J., & Thomas, M.P. (2019). Low income countries have the high-

est percentages of open access publication: A systematic computational


## analysis of the biomedical literature. PLoS One, 14(7), e0220229.


Jannot, A.-S., Agoritsas, T., Gayet-Ageron, A., Perneger, T.V. (2013). Cita-

tion bias favoring statistically signiﬁcant studies was present in medical

research. Journal of clinical epidemiology, 66(3), 296–301.

Karimi, F., Wagner, C., Lemmerich, F., Jadidi, M., Strohmaier, M. (2016).

Inferring gender from names on the web: A comparative evaluation

of gender detection methods.

Proceedings of the 25th international

conference companion on world wide web (pp. 53–54).

King, D.A.

(2004).

The scientiﬁc impact of nations.

Nature, 430(6997),

311–316.

Kumar, N., Mukhopadhyay, S., Gupta, M., Handa, A., Shukla, S.K. (2019).

Malware classiﬁcation using early stage behavioral analysis. 2019 14th

asia joint conference on information security (asiajcis) (pp. 16–23).

Langham-Putrow, A., Bakker, C., Riegelman, A. (2021). Is the open access

citation advantage real? a systematic review of the citation of open access

and subscription-based articles. PloS one, 16(6), e0253129.

Lawson, S. (2015). Fee waivers for open access journals. Publications, 3(3),

155–167.

LeBlanc, V., & Cox, M. (2017). Interpretation of the point-biserial correlation

coeﬃcient in the context of a school examination. Tutor. Quant. Methods

Psychol, 13, 46–56.

Lewis, C.L. (2018). The open access citation advantage: Does it exist and

what does it mean for libraries? Information technology and libraries,

37(3), 50–65.



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Liu, W., & Li, Y. (2018). Open access publications in sciences and social

sciences: A comparative analysis. Learned Publishing, 31(2), 107–119.

Matthias, L., Jahn, N., Laakso, M. (2019). The two-way street of open access

journal publishing: ﬂip it and reverse it. Publications, 7(2), 23.

McKiernan, E.C., Bourne, P.E., Brown, C.T., Buck, S., Kenall, A., Lin, J.,

. . . others (2016). Point of view: How open science helps researchers

succeed. elife, 5, e16800.

Momeni, F., Mayr, P., Dietze, S. (2022). How can i improve my scientiﬁc

impact? the most inﬂuential factors in predicting the h-index.

arXiv

preprint arXiv:2207.09655.

Momeni, F., Mayr, P., Fraser, N., Peters, I. (2021). What happens when a

journal converts to open access? a bibliometric analysis. Scientometrics,

1–17.

Munaf`o, M.R., Nosek, B.A., Bishop, D.V., Button, K.S., Chambers, C.D.,

Percie du Sert, N., . . . Ioannidis, J. (2017). A manifesto for reproducible

science. Nature human behaviour, 1(1), 1–9.

Olejniczak, A.J., & Wilson, M.J.

(2020).

Who’s writing open access (oa)

articles? characteristics of oa authors at ph. d.-granting institutions in

the united states. Quantitative science studies, 1(4), 1429–1450.

Ottaviani, J.

(2016).

The post-embargo open access citation advantage:

it exists (probably), it’s modest (usually), and the rich get richer (of

course). PLoS One, 11(8), e0159614.

Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivi`ere, V., Alperin, J.P., Matthias, L., Norlander,

B., . . . Haustein, S. (2018). The state of oa: a large-scale analysis of the

prevalence and impact of open access articles. PeerJ, 6, e4375.

Rimmert, C., Schwechheimer, H., Winterhager, M. (2017). Disambiguation of

author addresses in bibliometric databases-technical report.



***

24

Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case

Ross-Hellauer, T., Reichmann, S., Cole, N.L., Fessl, A., Klebel, T., Pontika, N.

(2021). Dynamics of cumulative advantage and threats to equity in open

science: a scoping review. Royal Society Open Science, 9(1), 211032.

Rouhi, S., Beard, R., Brundy, C. (2022). Left in the cold: the failure of apc

waiver programs to provide author equity. Science Editor, 5–13.

Roy, S.S., Chopra, R., Lee, K.C., Spampinato, C., Mohammadi-ivatlood, B.

(2020). Random forest, gradient boosted machines and deep neural net-

work for stock price forecasting: a comparative analysis on south korean

companies. International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing,

33(1), 62–71.

Samimi, A.J.

(2011).

Scientiﬁc output and gdp: Evidence from countries

around the world. Journal of Education and Vocational Research, 2(2),

38–41.

Santamar´ıa, L., & Mihaljevi´c, H.

(2018).

Comparison and benchmark of

name-to-gender inference services. PeerJ Computer Science, 4, e156.

Schroter, S., Tite, L., Smith, R. (2005). Perceptions of open access publishing:

interviews with journal authors. BMJ, 330(7494), 756.

Simard, M.-A., Ghiasi, G., Mongeon, P., Larivi`ere, V. (2021). Geographic

diﬀerences in the uptake of open access. 18th international conference

on scientometrics and informetrics conference, issi 2021.

Smith, A.C., Merz, L., Borden, J.B., Gulick, C.K., Kshirsagar, A.R., Bruna,

E.M. (2022, 02). Assessing the eﬀect of article processing charges on

the geographic diversity of authors using Elsevier’s “Mirror Journal”

system. Quantitative Science Studies, 2(4), 1123-1143. Retrieved from

https://doi.org/10.1162/qss a 00157

Sotudeh, H., Ghasempour, Z., Yaghtin, M.

(2015).

The citation advan-

tage of author-pays model: the case of springer and elsevier oa journals.

Scientometrics, 104(2), 581–608.



Which Factors are associated with Open Access Publishing? A Springer Nature Case Study

Spelmen, V.S., & Porkodi, R.

(2018).

A review on handling imbalanced


## data. 2018 international conference on current trends towards converging


technologies (icctct) (pp. 1–11).

Sullo, E. (2016). Open access papers have a greater citation advantage in

the author-pays model compared to toll access papers in springer and

elsevier open access journals. Evidence Based Library and Information

Practice, 11(1).

Wang, Z., Gl¨anzel, W., Chen, Y. (2020). The impact of preprints in library and

information science: an analysis of citations, usage and social attention

indicators. Scientometrics, 125(2), 1403–1423.

Xia, J. (2012). Positioning open access journals in a lis journal ranking. College

& Research Libraries, 73(2), 134–145.

Yamak, Z., Saunier, J., Vercouter, L.

(2016).

Detection of multiple iden-

tity manipulation in collaborative projects.

Proceedings of the 25th

international conference companion on world wide web (pp. 955–960).

Zhu, Y.

(2017).

Who support open access publishing? gender, discipline,

seniority and other factors associated with academics’ oa practice.

Scientometrics, 111(2), 557–579.