Quantifying gender imbalance in East Asian

academia: Research career and citation practice

Kazuki Nakajima1, 2, Ruodan Liu2, Kazuyuki Shudo3, and Naoki Masuda2, 4, 5, *

1Department of Mathematical and Computing Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8552,

Japan.

2Department of Mathematics, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo 14260, USA.

3Academic Center for Computing and Media Studies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

4Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering Program, State University of New York at Buffalo,

Buffalo 14260, USA.

5Center for Computational Social Science, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan.

*Corresponding author: naokimas@buffalo.edu

arXiv:2302.07843v2  [cs.DL]  22 Nov 2023


## ABSTRACT


Gender imbalance in academia has been confirmed in terms of a variety of indicators, and its magnitude often varies from

country to country. Europe and North America, which cover a large fraction of research workforce in the world, have been

the main geographical regions for research on gender imbalance in academia. However, the academia in East Asia, which

accounts for a substantial fraction of research, may be exposed to strong gender imbalance because Asia has been facing

persistent and stronger gender imbalance in society at large than Europe and North America. Here we use publication data

between 1950 and 2020 to analyze gender imbalance in academia in China, Japan, and South Korea in terms of the number

of researchers, their career, and citation practice. We found that, compared to the average of the other countries, gender

imbalance is larger in these three East Asian countries in terms of the number of researchers and their citation practice and

additionally in Japan in terms of research career. Moreover, we found that Japan has been exposed to the larger gender

imbalance than China and South Korea in terms of research career and citation practice.

1 Introduction

Gender imbalance persists in many aspects of society. It is present in academia in terms of research performance101,110,

academic awardees17,56,61,65, faculty hiring71,88,91, citations received by researchers16, funding applications11,106, authorship

positions39,50, and many more59. Furthermore, it has been observed that female researchers are more disadvantaged than

male researchers in hiring and promotion processes20,71,88,91 and that females tend to be less credited than males in research

contributions84. Mechanisms of these gender imbalances are intricately interrelated, complicating the formulation and evaluation

of policies to address gender imbalance in academia59. Persistent gender imbalance may generate a naive interpretation that

female and male researchers are not equivalent in their research capabilities, which may hamper women’s progression

in academia and undervalue women’s academic contributions. A growing body of evidence, however, suggests that the

gender imbalance may arise from academic systems (e.g., research career1,12,28,38,41,43,52,55,69,87) and practices of individual

researchers (e.g., citation practice13,16,22,23,44,45,53,75,94,95,103) rather than from their research performance.

Gender imbalance in academia has been investigated in terms of various indicators. First, it has widely been quantified by the

number of researchers. The number of male researchers has been consistently larger than that of female researchers in various

research disciplines1,19,39,80, across different career stages (e.g., assistant professors or lecturers5, full professors8), editorial

boards34,57,78, and academic honorees and awardees17,56,61,65. Second, gender imbalance in academia has been investigated in

terms of individual researchers’ careers1,12,28,38,41,43,52,55,69,87. For example, gender imbalance in the likelihood of becoming

a principal investigator is largely explained by that in the number of publications in the early career in life sciences52. Another

study showed that gender imbalance in the number of publications in the entire career is largely explained by that in the

publishing career length1. Third, citation practices are subject to gender imbalance13,16,22,23,44,45,53,75,94,95,103. For example,

male researchers tend to cite their own papers more often than female researchers do13,44. As another example, male researchers

tend to cite more papers written by male than female researchers with the difference in the number of papers written by male

and female authors being taken into account23,94,103. Because the number of citations received by a researcher is a basic

indicator of their research performance, gender imbalance in terms of the number of citations received may be associated with

other facets of gender imbalance such as research career. These and other data and analysis results are expected to promote the



formulation of policies to improve the gender imbalance in academia18,59. In this study, we focus on the aforementioned three

topics, i.e., the number of researchers, research careers, and citation practices, among many topics.

In general, gender imbalance in society differs from country to country. Evidence suggests that Asia has been exposed to

larger gender imbalance than Europe and North America. The World Economic Forum (WEF) in 2022 reported that Europe and

North America each has ranked higher than Central Asia, “East Asia and the Pacific”, and South Asia between 2006 and 2022

in terms of the gender gap index107. Therefore, gender imbalance in academia in Asia may be larger than that in Europe and

North America. However, many previous studies (e.g., Refs.1,2,26,48,49,69) have focused on researchers in Europe and North

America for two main reasons. First, researchers in Europe and North America have been mainly leading advanced research

and cover a large fraction of workforce. For example, the publications from Europe, North America, and Asia received 35.3%,

42.3%, and 17.7%, respectively, of the approximately 62 million citations made by over eight million publications published

between 2003 and 201079. In addition, 267 Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine, Physics, or Chemistry until 2017 are

from Europe, 310 from North America, and only 26 from the Asia-Pacific36. Second, in general, it is difficult to infer the gender

from Asian names86. For this reason, a previous study on gender imbalance made a conservative decision to exclude researchers

working in Asian countries (i.e., China, Japan, Malaysia, North Korea, Singapore, and South Korea) from the analysis1.

We focus on gender imbalance in academia in China, Japan, and South Korea because they are globally research-active East

Asian countries. Recent research outputs from these three countries are comparable to those from Europe and North America.

For example, the rapid growth of China’s share of research outputs in the world is remarkable33,118. Japanese research highly

ranked in the world until about 2000, whereas its research capability has been declining in recent years74. South Korea has

ranked high in the world in terms of research and development expenditure as a percentage of the gross domestic product96 and

ranks the sixth of 132 countries in the global innovation index in 2022108. Additionally, Times Higher Education reported that

the three countries hold 19 of the top 200 universities listed in the world university ranking 2023 (11 universities in China, two

in Japan, and six in South Korea)99. These numbers have largely been growing over recent years, while European and North

American universities are yet dominant in this ranking (e.g., 58 universities in the US, 28 in the UK, and 22 in Germany) and

other rankings. While Singapore also has a high research capability (e.g., it holds two universities that ranked 19th and 36th in

the same ranking), we exclude Singapore because its small number of researchers due to the country size would make our data


## analysis difficult.


In the present study, we hypothesize that China, Japan, and South Korea are exposed to larger gender imbalance than

other research-active countries. These countries in East Asia have long faced gender imbalance across a multitude of societal

aspects68. In fact, China, Japan, and South Korea ranked 102nd, 116th, and 99th, respectively, out of 146 countries in the global

gender gap in 2022107. There are a number of previous studies on historical factors associated with gender imbalance in East

Asian societies83. Furthermore, recent studies provided evidence of gender imbalance in academia in these three East Asian

countries, while it was only in terms of the number of researchers19,50,65. For example, all the three countries are included in

the bottom 10 among 43 countries in terms of the proportion of female researchers among the most highly cited researchers19.

These observations motivate us to further compare gender imbalance among the three East Asian countries and the other

countries.

We also hypothesize that Japanese academia is exposed to larger gender imbalance than Chinese and South Korean academia.

Japan has been exposed to large gender imbalance across areas of society including industries109, education64, and politics81.

In fact, Japan ranks the lowest in the global gender gap in 2022 among the G7 countries as well as in the region of “East Asia

and the Pacific”107. Moreover, a previous study reported that women accounted for 31 percent of doctoral graduates in Japan

in 2014, where the percentage is the lowest among the 14 countries investigated including China and South Korea89. Such a

scarcity of female students is a facet of gender imbalance in Japanese academia. In addition, previous studies suggested that

Japan has a larger gender imbalance in terms of the number of researchers than other countries including China and South

Korea39,50. However, gender imbalance among the three East Asian countries is not still well understood beyond in terms of

the number of researchers. A technical barrier here is to collect sufficient samples of gender-assigned researchers in the three

East Asian countries based on their names1,9,25.

To test these hypotheses, we use publication data between 1950 and 2020 provided by the OpenAlex project82 and quantify

gender imbalance in the number of researchers, research career, and citation practice of researchers in different countries

including the three East Asian countries. To this end, we use samples of 18,002,917 gender-assigned researchers, with 387,925

researchers in China, 1,267,205 researchers in Japan, 342,452 researchers in South Korea, and 16,005,335 researchers in the

other countries. We discuss limitations of the samples used in our analyses in Section 4.

2 Methods

2.1 Data

We use publication data from a snapshot of OpenAlex released on July 9th, 2022. OpenAlex is an open database of research

publication records, which replaces the discontinued Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG)82. See Section 4 for potential problems

2/31



with this data set. We used the 104,169,109 papers that were published between 1950 and 2020 because the number of academic

authors (i.e., those who write academic papers) working in South Korea before 1950 is small. For each paper z, the publication

date, “concepts”, which are research fields of the paper, publication type (e.g., “Journal Article” and “Proceedings Article”),

authors’ IDs, papers cited by z, and author position (i.e., first, middle, or last) are available. We assigned one of the 19 research

disciplines to each paper z based on the concepts associated with z (see Supplementary Section S1 for the assignment method).

2.2 Data preprocessing

We will compare gender imbalance in the research career and citation practice among authors working in China, Japan, and

South Korea. To this end, we infer the gender and nationality of authors from the publication data in various countries.

2.2.1 Identifying unique authors

Author-name disambiguation is a challenging problem in bibliographic data analysis30. Like the MAG, the OpenAlex uses a

proprietary algorithm to identify and assign a unique ID to each author using their name, publication record, citation patterns,

and if available, Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID)82. The OpenAlex’s author-name disambiguation algorithm

identified 40,134,800 authors. We assigned one of the 19 research disciplines to each of the 37,921,048 authors (94.5%) based

on their papers; we assigned no discipline to the other authors (see Supplementary Section S1 for the assignment method). We

also assigned a country to each author based on the country code (i.e., the ISO two-letter country code) associated with their

institutions (see Supplementary Section S2 for the assignment method). As a result, 7,684,496 authors were affiliated with an

institution in China, 2,103,087 authors in Japan, 784,120 authors in South Korea, and 29,563,097 authors in other countries. It

should be noted that this country assignment is distinct from the author’s country of origin, their ethnicity, or the language that

their name is from.

2.2.2 Separating first and last names

We use the first name to infer an author’s gender. However, the author’s name is not explicitly separated into the first and

last names in the OpenAlex data. Therefore, we enumerated candidates of their first and last names as follows. First, we

excluded the 112,763 authors (0.3%) with a one-word name, which is presumably due to error in the original data. Then,

because different words in the author’s name are separated by space (e.g., John Smith), we regarded that the last name is the

last space-separated word. For example, the last name of “John Smith” is Smith according to our procedure.

Next, we acquired the candidates of the first name for the authors in China, Japan, or South Korea (i.e., those for whom we

estimated the country to be China, Japan, or South Korea from their affiliations) as follows. Chinese or Japanese names written

in English typically consist of two words separated by space (e.g., Meiling Jiang or Hitomi Yamada). In South Korean names,

the first two or more space-separated words may be their first name. For example, “Gil Dong” may be the first name of the name

“Gil Dong Hong”. Therefore, if the author is in China, Japan, or South Korea and their name consists of k space-separated words,

denoted by w1,w2,...,wk, then we use w1, w1w2, ..., and w1 ···wk−1 as k −1 candidates of their first name. For example, the

unique candidate of the first name for the name “Gildong Hong” is “Gildong”. In contrast, the candidates of the first name for

the name “Gil Dong Hong” are “Gil” and “Gil Dong”.

For the rest of the authors, i.e., those who reside in countries other than China, Japan, and South Korea, we assume that the

first space-separated word of their name is their first name.

2.2.3 Gender of authors

We infer an author’s gender using an application programming interface (API) named the Gender API1. The database constituting

Gender API contains over six million unique names across 191 countries. Gender API has been deployed in previous studies

that investigated gender imbalance in academia16,23,90,94. Furthermore, its accuracy for Asian names is superior to competing

services on a benchmark data set86.

We constructed the gender assignment methods that yield at least 90% classification accuracy on the small set of samples

with the ground truth, which we call the test set, as follows. First, when one inputs a first-name candidate to Gender API, it

returns either “female”, “male”, or “unknown”, its ‘accuracy’ (which is a terminology of Gender API and different from the

classification accuracy on the test set discussed below; therefore we put the quotation marks here and in the following text),

and the number of samples of the provided first name in the database. Second, for the authors in either China, Japan, or South

Korea, we decided to feed their country, which is an optional input to the API, in addition to each candidate of their first name.

In contrast, for the authors in the other countries, we fed each candidate of their first name to the API without specifying their

country. We used the country in some cases and not others because the classification accuracy on the test set was higher in this

way. Note that we assessed the classification accuracy of any gender assignment method by manually checking the correctness

of the assigned gender on the test set (see Supplementary Section S3 for the details). Third, we discarded the API’s output

when the ‘accuracy’ that the API returned was smaller than θ or the number of samples was smaller than ns. We then identified

1https://gender-api.com/en/ (Accessed December 2022)

3/31



the largest ‘accuracy’ value among all the input first-name candidates that returned female as output. Similarly, we identified

the largest ‘accuracy’ value among all the input first-name candidates that returned male as output. If the former was larger than

the latter, we assigned female to the author. If the former was smaller than the latter, we assigned male to the author. If the

former was equal to the latter, then we did not assign female or male to the author.

We set the θ and ns values depending on a given author’s country and first publication year. Specifically, for the authors in

China, we set θ = 90% and ns = 10 if their first publication year, denoted by y, is 1990 or before; θ = 99% and ns = 10 if

1991 ≤y ≤2000; θ = 99% and ns = 50 if 2001 ≤y ≤2010; θ = 95% and ns = 10 if 2011 ≤y ≤2020. For the authors in

Japan, we set θ = 99% and ns = 10 if y ≤1990, and θ = 90% and ns = 10 if 1991 ≤y ≤2020. For the authors in the other

countries including South Korea, we set θ = 90% and ns = 10 for any y. With this choice, the classification accuracy on the

test set is at least 90% for each pair of the country (i.e., China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries) and the year group

(i.e., (i) y ≤1990, (ii) 1991 ≤y ≤2000, (iii) 2001 ≤y ≤2010, and (iv) 2011 ≤y ≤2020).

In this manner, we assigned a binary gender to 18,002,917 (with 6,485,368 females) out of the 40,134,800 authors, with

387,925 authors (with 89,838 females) in China, 1,267,205 authors (with 216,579 females) in Japan, 342,452 authors (with

44,257 females) in South Korea, and 16,005,335 authors (with 6,134,694 females) in the other countries. The fractions of

gender-assigned authors are 5.0% (≈387,925/7,684,496), 60.2% (≈1,267,205/2,103,087), 43.7% (≈342,452/784,120),

and 54.1% (≈16,005,335/29,563,097) in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries, respectively. The fraction of

gender-assigned authors is low for our Chinese samples. Therefore, our Chinese samples may lack representativeness compared

to the samples from Japan, Korea, and the other countries. We discuss this limitation in Section 4. The authors in the top 31

countries in terms of the number of gender-assigned authors combined account for 90.0% of those in the other countries. In

descending order in terms of the number of gender-assigned authors, these countries are US, UK, Germany, Brazil, France,

India, Canada, Spain, Italy, Australia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Netherlands, Switzerland, Mexico, Russian Federation, Poland,

Turkey, Sweden, Indonesia, Belgium, Egypt, Colombia, Israel, Denmark, Austria, Pakistan, Czechia, Greece, Argentina,

Finland, and Malaysia.

2.2.4 Nationality of authors

A Japanese author and a foreign author in Japan may be subject to different degrees of gender imbalance. To examine this

possibility, we used an API named Nationalize.io2 to infer the nationality of the authors in China, Japan, or South Korea. For

a given first or last name, Nationalize.io returns the candidates of the nationality of the person and their probabilities. The


## database constituting Nationalize.io contains approximately 114 million names across many countries.


For each author u, we ran Nationalize.io separately with u’s last name as input and with each candidate of u’s first name as

input. For each input, Nationalize.io returned up to five nationality candidates with the largest probabilities. Denote by c the

country in which u resides (i.e., China, Japan, or South Korea). If Nationalize.io outputs c as a candidate of u’s nationality and

its probability is at least 0.9 for at least one candidate of u’s first name or u’s last name, we set c as u’s nationality and therefore

regard that u is a native author (i.e., those who work in the country where they have nationality) in country c. In contrast, we

regard that u is a non-native author if the probability of country c is not greater than 0.1 for all candidates of u’s first name and

u’s last name. Specifically, we do so if at least one of the following three criteria is met for each of the author’s name words as

input: (i) Nationalize.io outputs c as a candidate of the nationality and its probability is 0.1 or smaller; (ii) Nationalize.io does

not output c as a candidate of the nationality, and the smallest probability of the country in the output of Nationalize.io is at

most 0.1, or (iii) Nationalize.io does not output c as a candidate, and the sum of the probabilities associated with all the output

countries is at least 0.9. Note that, if criterion (ii) or (iii) is met, then the probability of nationality c is at most 0.1 because the

API returns up to five nationality candidates with the largest probabilities. Otherwise, we regarded the author to be neither

native nor non-native to the country.

For example, if the author’s name is “Hitomi Yamada”, we separately input “Hitomi” and “Yamada” to Nationalize.io.

Suppose that Nationalize.io returns the following nationalities and their probabilities: {(Japan, 0.80), (China, 0.05)} for “Hitomi”

and {(Japan, 0.91), (Thailand, 0.02), (Vietnam, 0.01)} for “Yamada”. If the author is in Japan, we regard that the author is a

Japanese native because the probability of Japan given “Yamada” is larger than 0.9. In contrast, if Hitomi Yamada is in China,

we regard that the author is non-native because the output for the input name “Hitomi” satisfies criterion (i) and that for the

input name “Yamada” satisfies criteria (ii) and (iii).

Among the gender-assigned authors, we found 131,372 native and 13,700 non-native authors in China, 1,179,036 native and

17,030 non-native authors in Japan, and 200,325 native and 6,338 non-native authors in South Korea. Note that many authors

are not assigned to be native or non-native.

2https://nationalize.io/ (Accessed December 2022)

4/31



2.3 Characterizing gender imbalance in research career

We characterize the career of author u using the five indicators proposed in Ref.1: (i) total productivity defined as the number of

papers authored by u; (ii) total impact defined as the sum of the citation impact across papers authored by u (see Supplementary

Section S4 for the definition of citation impact of a paper); (iii) career length defined as the difference between the publication

dates of the first and last papers authored by u, which we divide by 365; (iv) annual productivity defined as the ratio of u’s total

productivity to u’s career length; (v) number of coauthors defined by the number of authors that coauthored at least one paper

with u.

For the combination of an indicator and a set of authors, we define the gender gap by (µF −µM)/µM, where µF and µM

denote the mean value of the indicator for the female and male authors in the set, respectively. A positive gender gap value

implies that females have stronger careers than males in terms of the indicator used, and vice versa.

2.4 Characterizing gender imbalance in citation practice

We quantify gender imbalance in citation practice of authors in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries using the


## methods developed in Ref.23. We focus on citations between pairs of papers among the 27,616,941 papers for each of which


both the first and last authors have the same country, including the case of a country other than China, Japan, and South Korea.

We denote by S the set of all the papers. We identify four categories, i.e., MM, MW, WM, and WW, based on the gender of the

first and last authors, where the first letter, M or W, indicates that the first author is male (man) or female (woman), respectively,

and the second letter indicates the gender of the last author. We classify single-author papers to the MM or WW category.

Consider two subsets of papers denoted by Sfrom ⊆S and Sto ⊆S. We measure the extent to which the papers in Sfrom

over- or under-cite the papers in Sto and in a given gender category (i.e., MM, MW, WM, or WW). To this end, for each paper

z ∈Sfrom, we focused on citations made by z to each paper z′ ∈Sto such that (i) the publication date of z′ is at most ten years

older than that of z and (ii) both first and last authors of z′ are neither the first nor last author of z. The original method used all

the citations made by z to any papers published before z to investigate gender imbalance in citation practice23. In contrast, a

previous study adopted criterion (i) to measure gender imbalance in the research career1. We adopt criterion (i) because in

this manner we can simultaneously examine gender imbalance in research career and citation practice with the same data. We

impose criterion (ii) to avoid self-citations. We denote by Sto(z) the set of the papers that meet criteria (i) and (ii) for a given

paper z.

Given a gender category g ∈{MM, MW, WM, WW}, we first count the citations made by each paper z ∈Sfrom to the papers

in Sto(z) and in gender category g, which we denote by nz→g,obs. Then, we compare ∑z∈Sfrom nz→g,obs with the expectation under

the so-called random-draws model23. The random-draws model assumes that cz papers cited by paper z ∈Sfrom are drawn from

Sto(z) uniformly at random, where cz is the number of citations made by z to the papers in Sto(z). Then, the expected number of

citations that the papers in Sto(z) and in gender category g receive from z under the random-draws model, denoted by nz→g,rand,

is equal to czpz,g, where pz,g is the fraction of the papers that are in both Sto(z) and g. We sum nz→g,rand over z, which yields the

expected number of citations received by the papers in both Sto and g. Then, we calculate the over/under-citation of the papers

that belong to both Sto and g as (∑z∈Sfrom nz→g,obs −∑z∈Sfrom nz→g,rand)/∑z∈Sfrom nz→g,rand.

Previous studies additionally deployed another reference model, called the relevant characteristics model, for calculating the

expected number of citations23. We do not use this method because the Newton’s method to determine the smoothing parameters

does not sufficiently converge due to a huge number of papers. Therefore, the present study reports the over/under-citation

obtained using the random-draws model.

3 Results

3.1 Gender imbalance in research career

We first examine gender imbalance in the set of authors in China (i.e., their country of affiliation was estimated to be China),

Japan, South Korea, and the other countries. We identified 7,684,496 authors in China, 2,103,087 authors in Japan, 784,120

authors in South Korea, and 29,563,097 authors in the other countries. In each country group, the number of authors has

increased from 1990 to 2020, in particular in China (see Fig. 1(a)); by definition, we counted the authors who had published

their first paper in each given year. Among these authors, we were able to assign a binary gender to 387,925 authors in China,

1,267,205 authors in Japan, 342,452 authors in South Korea, and 16,005,335 authors in the other countries. The fractions of

female authors are 23.2%, 17.1%, and 12.9% in China, Japan, and South Korea, respectively. The ranking among the three

East Asian countries in our data set is consistent with previous results2,19. These fractions are smaller than that for the other

countries in our data set (i.e., 38.3%). As a reference, the fraction for 83 countries excluding China, Japan, and South Korea

was 28.5% in a previous study1. The fraction of female authors is the highest in psychology and the lowest in engineering

among the 19 disciplines in the three East Asian countries, whereas it is the highest in sociology and the lowest in physics in

the other countries (see Supplementary Section S5 for details). The fraction of female authors has increased over the three

5/31



(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Counts of authors in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries. (a) Number of authors between 1990 and

2020. (b) Fraction of female authors between 1990 and 2020.

decades in each country group (see Fig. 1(b)). Specifically, while female authors represented 16.4%, 6.4%, 3.4%, and 28.2% in

China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries, respectively, in 1990, the fraction increased to 24.8%, 22.2%, 19.5%, and

45.4% in 2020. The fractions for China, Japan, and South Korea have been smaller than that for the other countries over the

three decades (see Fig. 1(b)).

We now compare gender imbalance in the research career among different countries. In the remainder of this subsection,

we focus on the gender-assigned authors in each country group (i.e., China, Japan, South Korea, or the other countries) who

meet the following criteria: (i) they publish at least two papers, (ii) the difference between the publication dates of their first

and last papers is more than 365 days, (iii) they publish fewer than 20 papers per year on average, and (iv) their last publication

date is on or before December 31st, 2015. Criteria (i)–(iii) are the same as those employed in Ref.1. We extended the year

of the last publication in criterion (iv) from 2010, which was used in Ref.1 given that the last year that their data set covered

was 2016, to 2015 given that the last year that our data set covers is 2020. There are 17,813 such authors (with 20.3% being

females) in China, 327,946 (14.0% females) in Japan, 57,466 (9.8% females) in South Korea, and 2,544,059 (33.4% females)

in the other countries.

We have found that the authors in Japan are exposed to a notably larger gender gap in terms of the total productivity than

those in “the other countries” group, whose gender gap is larger than those in China and South Korea (see the bars labeled

“Overall” in Fig. 2(a)). These results persist when we compare the top 20% female authors and the top 20% male authors in

each country group (see the bars labeled “Top 20%” in Fig. 2(a)). When we compare the middle 20% females and the middle

20% males in each country group, the gender gap is almost eliminated for China and South Korea but remained for Japan

and the other countries (see the bars labeled “Middle 20%” in Fig. 2(a)). Last, there is no gender gap between the bottom

20% females and the bottom 20% males in each country group (see the bars labeled “Low 20%” in Fig. 2(a)). Our results for

China and South Korea including the magnification of the gender gap in the “Top 20%” authors and its suppression in the

middle and bottom groups of authors are similar to those in a recent study analyzing 83 countries although that study excluded

China, Japan, and South Korea1. All the non-zero differences between the two genders shown in Fig. 2(a) are significant (see

Supplementary Section S6 for statistical results).

In terms of the total impact of an author, we have observed qualitatively different results (see Fig. 2(b)). Female authors

receive more citations than male authors on average in China and South Korea and vice versa in Japan and the other countries.

These results remain qualitatively the same when we compare the top 20% females and the top 20% males in each country

group. In contrast, in the comparison between the middle 20% females and the middle 20% males, and between the bottom

20% females and the bottom 20% males, the females receive more citations than the males in each country group. All these

gender gaps are statistically significant (see Supplementary Section S6). Our results for China and South Korea are different

from the previous results1 in that the overall and top 20% females receive more citations than the males in China and South

Korea in ours. Our results for Japan and the other countries are consistent with the previous results1.

For further investigation of the gender gap in total productivity, we decompose the total productivity of each author into

the product of their annual productivity and career length1; the career length is defined as the difference between the first and

last publication dates. We have found a small gender gap in the annual productivity of the authors in each country group (see

Fig. 2(c)). The gender gap remains small in the comparison between the top 20% females and the top 20% males in each

6/31



(a) Total productivity

–42.6%

–20.2%

–31.2%

–9.3%

–42.1%

–54.0%

–31.3%

–18.6%

–13.2%

+1.8%

–21.6%

–4.7%

South

Korea

China

Japan

Other

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

(b) Total impact

–20.7%

+21.6%

–19.9%

+37.7%

–27.0%

+20.4%

–27.4%

+13.3%

+126%

+9.1%

+47.7%

+15.0%

South

Korea

China

Japan

Other

+87.5%

+101%

+39.3%

+2998%

(c) Annual productivity

+3.3%

+8.9%

+2.9%

+1.7%

+2.4%

+6.0%

–1.9%

–3.3%

+3.0%

+6.4%

+12.2%

+5.2%

South

Korea

China

Japan

Other

+19.1%

+16.4%

+7.8%

+18.7%

(d) Career length

–11.8%

–39.6%

–25.9%

–29.6%

–32.2%

–42.1%

–27.7%

–13.4%

–7.8%

–32.8%

–24.8%

–23.9%

South

Korea

Japan

Other

China

–12.4%

0.0%

0.0%

–14.7%

Figure 2. Gender imbalance in the research career for the authors in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries. (a)

Total productivity. (b) Total impact. (c) Annual productivity. (d) Career length. In each panel, the gender gap for all authors in

the country group, top 20%, middle 20%, and bottom 20% authors are shown. For example, the top 20% refers to the gender

gap between the top 20% females and the top 20% males in the country group.

7/31



(a)

Native

Non-native

Any position

South

Korea

Prominent position

China

Japan

(b)

South

Korea

Other

China

Japan

Figure 3. Gender imbalance attributed to the author’s nationality or author’s position in the author list. (a) Native versus

non-native authors. (b) Any eligible papers versus those in which the author occupies a prominent position.

country group as well. Consistent with these results, many of the gender gaps shown in Fig. 2(c) are statistically insignificant

(see Supplementary Section S6). These results are consistent with the previous results1.

The lack of gender gap in annual productivity in each country group suggests that the country-to-country difference in the

gender gap in total productivity may be ascribed to that in career length. As expected, the gender gap in the career length is

present in each country group both when we compare all females and males and when we compare the top 20% authors of each

gender (see Fig. 2(d)). All the non-zero gender gaps shown in Fig. 2(d) are significant (see Supplementary Section S6). The

gender gap in the career length is the strongest in Japan, then “the other countries” group, South Korea, and the weakest in

China. This result is also expected because the annual productivity is roughly free of the gender gap and the gender gap in the

total productivity is also the strongest in Japan, then “the other countries” group, South Korea, and the weakest in China. The

presence of a gender gap in career length for the overall and top 20% authors by gender in each country group is consistent

with the previous results1.

To sum up, we found that the gender gaps in terms of the four indicators in each country group are overall similar to the

previous results1 and that these gender gaps are the largest in Japan, then “the other countries” group, South Korea, and weakest

in China.

Gender imbalance may be different between native and non-native authors in a country. For example, Chinese authors

working in China and foreign authors working in China may be exposed to different levels of gender imbalance. Therefore,

we compare gender imbalance between “native” authors and “non-native” authors in China, Japan, and South Korea. There

are 4,915 natives (with 20.7% females) and 974 non-natives (with 25.6% females) in China; 311,550 natives (with 13.2%

females) and 2,858 non-natives (with 19.0% females) in Japan; and 32,144 natives (with 13.0% females) and 666 non-natives

(with 17.7% females) in South Korea. We compare the four indices of gender gap between native and non-native authors in

China, Japan, and South Korea in Fig. 3(a). The figure suggests that non-native females tend to be at more disadvantage than

native females in China. In contrast, in Japan, native females tend to be at more disadvantage in terms of research career than

non-native females except in terms of annual productivity. The results for South Korea are, roughly speaking, intermediate

between those for China and Japan. These results suggest that natives and non-natives perceive different gender imbalance and

how they do so depends on countries even within East Asia.

While we have been ignorant of the author’s position, a previous study suggested that female authors are less likely to

appear in the prominent author position (i.e., the first- or last-author position or sole author)50,105; authors in these positions

generally play main roles in the research and writing of the paper in many research disciplines. To investigate whether gender

imbalance depends on the author position, we now restrict the set of papers for each author u to those in which u is in the

prominent position. Then, using the restricted set of papers, we examine whether or not u meets the same four criteria for

8/31



(a) Total productivity

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(b) Total impact

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

Figure 4. Gender imbalance in research performance after controlling for the career length or the number of coauthors. (a)

Total productivity. (b) Total impact. Each panel shows the results of the matching experiment in which the author’s career

length (CL) and/or their number of coauthors (NC) are controlled in addition to their country group, year of the first

publication, and research discipline. The bar labeled “No control” in each panel is identical to that labeled “Overall” for the

corresponding indicator and country group in Fig. 2.

filtering the authors. Note that u may not satisfy the criteria after we restrict the papers in this manner even if u satisfies the

same criteria based on the entire set of papers (e.g., u has written papers but never as prominent author). After removal of

the authors that do not satisfy the four criteria as prominent author, there are 10,180 authors (with 15.4% females) for China,

185,874 authors (with 10.2% females) for Japan, 31,936 authors (with 8.3% females) for South Korea, and 1,825,707 authors

(with 29.4% females) for the other countries. The gender gap qualitatively remains the same in each country group when one

calculates the four indicators of research career only using the papers in which u is in the prominent position (see Fig. 3(b)). In

other words, females publish fewer papers, receive more citations in China and South Korea but fewer citations in Japan and

the other countries, and have shorter career lengths than males, and the annual productivity is similar between the females

and males. Furthermore, female authors tend to be at more disadvantage in the prominent author position than in any author

position in all the country groups, except in terms of the career length for China (see Fig. 3(b)).

Among our research performance indicators (i.e., total productivity, total impact, and annual productivity), we have observed

gender imbalance in the total productivity and total impact. Prior research showed that gender imbalance in the career length1

and that in the number of coauthors54 explain most of the variance in the research performance. To test the existence of similar

correlates in each country group, we carry out matching experiments1,54 in which the gender gap in terms of the career length

or number of coauthors is eliminated. We generate the three matched sets of authors as follows. For each female author, we

select without replacement a male that has the same country group, the same year of the first publication, the same discipline,

and the same career length in the case of the first matched set. For the second matched set, we impose that the matched male

author has the same number of coauthors instead of the same career length as the female author. For the third matched set, we

impose that the matched male author has both the same career length and the same number of coauthors. In these matching

experiments, we do not use the authors to whom a research discipline has not been assigned. Then, we measure the gender

imbalance within each set.

We have found that the gender gaps in both total productivity and total impact have drastically decreased after controlling for

either the career length or the number of coauthors in all the country groups, except for total impact for China and South Korea

(see Fig. 4). When we only use the papers in which the author is in the prominent position, the gender gaps have considerably

decreased in the matching experiments in all the country groups (see Supplementary Section S7 for details). Therefore,

consistent with the previous results1,54, both the career length and the number of coauthors seem to be key contributors to the

gender imbalance in the total productivity and total impact of authors in East Asia as well as in other countries. Moreover, the

gender gaps in total productivity and total impact little decrease after controlling for both the career length and the number of

9/31



coauthors compared with controlling for just one of them. These results suggest that the author’s career length and number of

coauthors are correlated. In fact, the Pearson correlation coefficient between the career length and the number of coauthors of

the authors is roughly 0.4 for each country group (see Supplementary Section S8 for details).

3.2 Gender imbalance in citation practice

The gender imbalance in research performance may owe not only to differences between females and males in their research

career, such as the career length and the number of coauthors, but also those in citation practices29,44,53. Therefore, we compare

gender imbalance in citation practice between authors in each country group in this section. We use the 27,616,941 papers each

of which falls into four gender categories (i.e., MM, MW, WM, or WW) and has the first and last authors in the same country

group (i.e., China, Japan, South Korea, or the other countries). Note that we regard sole-author papers by males and females as

MM and WW papers, respectively. There are 66,569 papers (i.e., 53,918 MM, 2,451 MW, 3,945 WM, and 6,255 WW papers)

available for this analysis from China, 1,741,061 papers (i.e., 1,547,977 MM, 38,199 MW, 130,235 WM, and 24,650 WW

papers) from Japan, 248,388 papers (i.e., 212,509 MM, 6,507 MW, 23,999 WM, and 5,373 WW papers) from South Korea, and

25,560,923 papers (i.e., 16,240,956 MM, 2,000,691 MW, 3,546,901 WM, and 3,772,375 WW papers) from the other countries.

We now compare gender imbalance in citations made by authors in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries. We

first count the number of citations made by any papers from each country group to any papers in each gender category (i.e., MM,

MW, WM, and WW). Then, we compare the obtained citation counts with the expected numbers for the random-draws model,

which assumes that each paper cites other papers uniformly at random. We have found that main patterns of over/under-citation

of papers in each gender category is qualitatively the same in China, Japan, and South Korea; papers published in these countries

over-cite MM and WM papers and under-cite WW papers (see Fig. 5(a)). The degree of these over/under-citations is weaker

in China than in Japan and South Korea, and slightly larger in Japan than in South Korea (see Fig. 5(a)). Compared with the

three East Asian countries, the papers published in the other countries cite less MM papers and more MW, WM, and WW

papers (see Fig. 5(a)). Our results of the over-citation of MM papers, which is observed for China, Japan, and South Korea, and

the under-citation of WW papers, which is observed for any country group, are consistent with those in previous studies that

examined papers from different countries altogether23,32,103.

The amount of over/under-citation made by the papers in each gender category is qualitatively similar among China, Japan,

South Korea, and the other countries, which we summarize as follows. First, the MM papers over-cite MM and WM papers

and under-cite WW papers (see Fig. 5(b)). Second, the MW papers under-cite MM and WW papers and over-cite MW and

WM papers (see Fig. 5(c)). The WM papers from each country group also show qualitatively the same citation practice (see

Fig. 5(d)). Therefore, the MM, MW, and WM papers from each country group under-cite WW papers on average. Third, in

contrast, the WW papers under-cite MM papers and over-cite MW, WM, and WW papers (see Fig. 5(e)). These results are

consistent with the previous results for papers published from any countries on neuroscience in that MM, MW, and WM papers

under-cite WW papers and that WW papers under-cite MM papers and over-cite WW papers23,103. Fourth, papers in any

gender category of author tend to cite WM papers more than MW papers (see Figs. 5(b)–(e)). In sum, we observe consistent

gender imbalance with which papers involving males in a prominent position tend to over-cite male papers, broadly defined,

and papers in which the first and last authors are both females tend to over-cite female papers.

Figure 5 also reveals differences in over/under-citation behavior among the four country groups. First, in any gender

category of author, papers from the three East Asian countries under-cite WW papers and over-cite MM papers more strongly

than those in the other countries, except for the MM papers from China. Second, papers from the three East Asian countries

under-cite MW and WM papers more strongly than in those in the other countries, while we do not have active interpretation of

this result. Third, among the three East Asian countries, in any gender category of author, Japanese and South Korean papers

under-cite WW papers more strongly than Chinese papers.

Citation practice is often subject to country bias. For example, health professionals in the US and UK tend to over-cite

articles published in a medical journal of their own countries14; in nanotechnology, Chinese authors are more likely to cite each

other than US authors do93. Motivated by these previous findings, we hypothesize that papers from China, Japan, and South

Korea cite papers from the same country in a different gender-biased manner compared to when citing papers from the other

countries. To investigate this possibility, we decompose citations made by the papers from each country into domestic citations

(i.e., citations to the papers published in the same country as the authors’) and foreign citations (i.e., citations to the papers

published in different countries), and calculate gender imbalance separately for domestic and foreign citations for each country.

It turns out that patterns of the over/under-citations for the foreign citations are qualitatively the same as those for the

overall citations (see Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. S3). This result is expected because the foreign citations are yet dominant

in China, Japan, and South Korea; they account for 98.2% of the overall citations in China, 77.8% in Japan, and 93.4% in South

Korea. We now turn to domestic citations made by the papers from China, Japan, and South Korea. First, while the papers from

China under-cite WW papers on average (see Fig. 5(a)), they over-cite WW papers from China (see Supplementary Fig. S2(a)).

Second, papers in any gender category and any country are more likely to cite WW papers from the same country than they cite

10/31



China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(a) From all

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(b) From MM

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(c) From MW

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(d) From WM

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(e) From WW

Figure 5. Gender imbalance in citations made by papers whose authors are in China, Japan, South Korea, and the other

countries. (a) All papers. (b) MM papers. (c) MW papers. (d) WM papers. (e) WW papers.

11/31



WW papers from any country, except for MM papers from Japan (see Figs. 5(b)–(e) and Supplementary Figs. S2(b)–(e)). Third,

WW papers from each country are more likely to cite papers involving female authors in a prominent position (i.e., MW, WM,

or WW papers) in the same country than they cite those in any country (see Fig. 5(e) and Supplementary Fig. S2(e)). In fact, on

average, the WW papers from China, Japan, and South Korea over-cite the MW, WM, or WW papers from the same country at

least twice more than they over-cite the MW, WM, or WW papers in general. In particular, the WW papers from Japan and

South Korea over-cite the WW papers from the same country 56.8 and 35.8 times, respectively, more than they over-cite WW

papers in general. These results are also consistent with the previous findings that authors tend to cite papers from the same

country6,7,14 and that the author’s gender and another variable (e.g., authors’ race and country) can have combined effects on

gender imbalance in citation behavior46,115.

4 Discussion

In this study, we hypothesized that China, Japan, and South Korea are exposed to larger gender imbalance in academia than

other countries. Therefore, we compared gender imbalance among authors in the four country groups (i.e., China, Japan, South

Korea, and the other countries). We found that the fractions of female authors in China, Japan, and South Korea are smaller than

that in the other countries. We also found that the gender imbalance in research career is notably larger in Japan and is present

but weaker in China and South Korea than in the other countries. In terms of citation practice, papers from the three East Asian

countries are more likely to under-cite WW papers (i.e., papers in which women occupy the prominent author positions) than

those in the other countries do. These results are largely consistent with the previous results in that Asian countries tend to

be exposed to larger gender imbalance in academia than other countries2,9,19,24,25,39,50,98. Because East Asia accounts for

a substantial fraction of research expenditure, number of researchers, and research output in the world, gender imbalance in

academia in East Asia is considered to affect our understanding of the global landscape of gender imbalance in academia.

We also hypothesized that Japan is exposed to larger gender imbalance in academia than China and South Korea. We

compared the gender imbalance among authors in China, Japan, and South Korea aided by a unified and high-accuracy gender

assignment method. In our data set, the fraction of female authors was the largest in China and smallest in South Korea; in

previous studies, it was the largest in China2,19,39,50 and the smallest in Japan39,50 or South Korea2,19. Therefore, our results

are roughly consistent with theirs. We also found that the gender imbalance in research career and the degree of under-citation

of any WW papers are larger in Japan than in China and South Korea. Haghani et al. suggested that gender imbalance in

total productivity has been larger in Japan than in South Korea between 2006 and 202035, which is consistent with our results.

Due to a poor accuracy at identifying the gender from East Asian names, other studies either failed to sample a sufficient

number of gender-assigned researchers in the three East Asian countries or excluded those researchers in an early stage of their


## analysis1,9,25. In contrast, we addressed this technical barrier to comprehensively compare gender imbalance in the academia of


three East Asian countries in terms of the number of researchers, research career, and citation practice of individual researchers.

Our results are a significant addition to the previous studies that examined the three countries but only in terms of the number

of researchers.

For bibliographic data analysis involving gender comparison, one usually needs to identify authors’ gender from their

names1,50,105. This task is difficult for East Asian names9,41,86. We built an algorithm to detect the gender of Chinese, Japanese,

and Korean names with a classification accuracy of at least 90% on our benchmark data. In the course of parameter tuning,

we found that, given the parameter values, the classification accuracy depends on the era, which is quantified by the year of

the first publication, as well as the country. For example, for the authors in China, we needed to impose a higher threshold of

‘accuracy’, θ, when the names of more recent than old authors are input. This phenomenon implies that the gender of more

recent Chinese names is more difficult to detect. In contrast, it was more difficult to detect the gender of older than more recent

authors in Japan. We also observed that tuning the threshold on the number of samples in the database, ns, can improve the

accuracy of gender inference for East Asian names; other studies used the same technique before for author names from various

countries2,4. Despite our efforts, the fraction of gender-assigned authors in China (i.e., 5.0%) was much lower than that in

Japan and South Korea (i.e., 60.3% and 43.7%, respectively). Therefore, our Chinese data may not be representative of the

entire population of Chinese researchers. It is notably difficult to infer gender from Chinese names written in English9,25,42. In

fact, previous studies failed to collect sufficiently many samples of Chinese gender-assigned authors when their names were

written in English9,39. Another study used 31,150 samples of Chinese gender-assigned authors whose names were written in

Mandarin25. The fraction of the gender-assigned authors in the latter study was 40.7% (≈31,150/76,627), which is much larger

than the fraction for our Chinese samples. Similarly, case studies in Italy1, Norway1, and Poland49 exploited the researcher’s

gender provided by local academic databases to enhance the accuracy of gender assignment. Given these motivating results,

investigating gender imbalance in Chinese academia using data with names and other information in the Chinese language

warrants future work.

We did not systematically examine different gender inference tools. We employed Gender API, which yielded the highest

accuracy on average for Asian names on a benchmark data set86. In fact, there are more recent developments in gender inference

12/31



tools. For example, Van Buskirk et al. developed an open-source gender inference tool built on publicly available data spanning

over 150 countries and more than a century100. Antonoyiannakis et al. proposed a gender inference method to address the

issue of overestimating the gender likelihood for rare names by relaxing a conventional sampling assumption on names4.

Combining our gender-inference algorithm with such tools may improve the accuracy of gender inference for East Asian names.

However, we should also note that the accuracy of gender inference tools is approaching a plateau100 and that error rates are

heterogeneously distributed for names with different languages, races, and ethnicities60, which both pose challenges.

Recent studies suggested that the strength of gender imbalance varies by the academic author’s race and ethnicity10,46.

Similar to these studies, we found that the strength of gender imbalance is partially attributed to the author’s nationality (i.e.,

the author’s country of origin inferred from their first name) in the three East Asian countries. Alesina et al. introduced “ethnic

inequality” measured by within-country differences in well-being across ethnic groups and compared it across 173 countries

including the three East Asian countries3. Their results suggested that ethnic inequality is much larger in China than in Japan

and South Korea3. It may be fruitful to measure ethnicity inequality in academia and investigate interaction between gender

imbalance and ethnicity inequality in academia in East Asia and elsewhere. On the other hand, inferring an author’s race,

ethnicity, or nationality may incur a bias. In fact, a recent study found that thresholding-based approaches to inference of races

from the author’s name are not accurate47. The accuracy of inferring the author’s nationality may be similarly compromised for

some nations in our samples. Detailed analyses of biases in the inference of author’s nationality warrant future work.

There remains a long-standing need to collect and analyze data on gender representation across different aspects of academia

and to evaluate policy interventions aiming at improving gender imbalance59. We limited our analyses to gender imbalance in

academia in terms of the number of researchers, research careers, and citation practices, among many issues and indices. Other

issues include gender diversity in research teams63,84,112,114, research careers of female researchers who have children69,87,116,

associations between gender, race, and ethnicity imbalances in academia10,46, which we discussed above, underrepresentation

of female researchers in peer-review processes31,37,72,90, and gender imbalance in terms of the effects of the COVID pandemic

around 2020 on research careers21,67,73.

Quantitative tracking tools for addressing gender imbalance in academia have also been proposed59. Examples include

recent efforts to address gender imbalance in citation practices of individual authors using a so-called Citation Diversity

Statement and cleanBib tool117,119. The Gender Balance Assessment Tool is a tool to quantify gender imbalance in words

appearing in documents (e.g., a conference program)92. NamePrism is a tool to infer the ethnicity, nationality, or race from

a given name113. Such tools are expected to promote our quantitative understanding of gender imbalance in academia. For

example, Ruzycki et al. used the tool proposed in Ref.92 to quantify gender imbalance in speakers at major academic medical

conferences held in Canada and the United States between 2007 and 201785. Webber et al. also used the same tool to quantify

gender bias in words within documents on evaluations of pediatric faculty104. Liu et al. used NamePrism to quantify race

imbalance in editorial board members of journals published by six publishers58. Deploying these and similar tracking tools to

investigating regional differences in gender and race imbalance in academia may be fruitful.

Our study has additional limitations. First, when analyzing the research career, we focused on the authors whose last

publication year was 2015 or earlier. Therefore, our data set may not reflect recent efforts to support the academic participation

of women in East Asian countries (e.g., China62, Japan77, and South Korea51). Moreover, recent changes in academic

environments in China are remarkable, as evidenced by the rapid growth of research outputs33,111,118, the number of doctoral

students15, and the number of researchers who returned to China after receiving academic training in foreign countries15.

Because we needed to discard many researchers in China because of the difficulty in gender identification, further work is

needed to verify our findings on China. Second, we only used the OpenAlex database. Because OpenAlex is a successor of

MAG, our results may be biased due to the problems that the MAG had. For example, MAG database covers a larger number

of publications but misses more citations than other data (e.g., Scopus and Web of Science) do102. Third, our analysis only

focused on researchers writing academic papers. A recent study suggested that Japanese children acquire the gender stereotype

to associate brilliance with males after they start to go to school76. It is also important to investigate gender imbalance in wider

education than has been investigated in the present study (e.g., Ref.27). Fourth, statistical modeling including that for comparing

the results among countries may help us to identify further features of gender imbalance in East Asian academia. Addressing

these and other limitations is expected to help us better quantify and improve gender imbalance in academic systems and in

practices of individual researchers.


## Acknowledgments


Kazuki Nakajima was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21J10415. Naoki Masuda was supported in part

by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) Moonshot R&D (under Grant Number JPMJMS2021) and in part by JSPS

KAKENHI under Grant Numbers JP21H04595 and JP23H03414.

13/31



Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing interests.


## References



## 1. G. Abramo, D. W. Aksnes, and C. A. D’Angelo. Gender differences in research performance within and between


countries: Italy vs Norway. Journal of Informetrics, 15:101144, 2021.


## 2. G. Abramo, C. A. D’Angelo, and G. Murgia. Gender differences in research collaboration. Journal of Informetrics,


7:811–822, 2013.


## 3. A. Alesina, S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou. Ethnic inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 124:428–488, 2016.



## 4. M. Antonoyiannakis, H. Chaté, S. Dalena, J. Thomas, and A. S. Villar. Global method for gender profile estimation from


distribution of first names. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07587, 2023.


## 5. E. Auriol, G. Friebel, A. Weinberger, and S. Wilhelm. Underrepresentation of women in the economics profession more


pronounced in the United States compared to heterogeneous Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of

the United States of America, 119:e2118853119, 2022.


## 6. A. Baccini, G. De Nicolao, and E. Petrovich. Citation gaming induced by bibliometric evaluation: A country-level


comparative analysis. PLOS ONE, 14:e0221212, 2019.


## 7. V. Bakare and G. Lewison. Country over-citation ratios. Scientometrics, 113:1199–1207, 2017.



## 8. G. Barabino, M. Frize, F. Ibrahim, E. Kaldoudi, L. Lhotska, L. Marcu, M. Stoeva, V. Tsapaki, and E. Bezak. Solutions to


gender balance in STEM fields through support, training, education and mentoring: Report of the international women in

medical physics and biomedical engineering task group. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26:275–292, 2020.


## 9. M. H. K. Bendels, R. Müller, D. Brueggmann, and D. A. Groneberg. Gender disparities in high-quality research revealed


by Nature Index journals. PLOS ONE, 13:e0189136, 2018.


## 10. M. A. Bertolero, J. D. Dworkin, S. U. David, C. L. Lloreda, P. Srivastava, J. Stiso, D. Zhou, K. Dzirasa, D. A. Fair,


A. N. Kaczkurkin, B. J. Marlin, D. Shohamy, L. Q. Uddin, P. Zurn, and D. S. Bassett. Racial and ethnic imbalance in

neuroscience reference lists and intersections with gender. bioRxiv, 2020. DOI: 10.1101/2020.10.12.336230.


## 11. L. Bornmann, R. Mutz, and H.-D. Daniel. Gender differences in grant peer review: A meta-analysis. Journal of


Informetrics, 1:226–238, 2007.


## 12. C. J. A. Bradshaw, J. M. Chalker, S. A. Crabtree, B. A. Eijkelkamp, J. A. Long, J. R. Smith, K. Trinajstic, and


V. Weisbecker. A fairer way to compare researchers at any career stage and in any discipline using open-access citation


## data. PLOS ONE, 16:1–15, 2021.



## 13. E. Z. Cameron, A. M. White, and M. E. Gray. Solving the Productivity and Impact Puzzle: Do Men Outperform Women,


or are Metrics Biased? BioScience, 66:245–252, 2016.


## 14. F. M. Campbell. National bias: A comparison of citation practices by health professionals. Bulletin of the Medical Library


Association, 78:376, 1990.


## 15. C. Cao, J. Baas, C. S. Wagner, and K. Jonkers. Returning scientists and the emergence of China’s science system. Science


and Public Policy, 47:172–183, 2019.


## 16. N. Caplar, S. Tacchella, and S. Birrer. Quantitative evaluation of gender bias in astronomical publications from citation


counts. Nature Astronomy, 1:0141, 2017.


## 17. D. Card, S. DellaVigna, P. Funk, and N. Iriberri. Gender gaps at the academies. Proceedings of the National Academy of


Sciences of the United States of America, 120:e2212421120, 2023.


## 18. B. J. Casad, J. E. Franks, C. E. Garasky, M. M. Kittleman, A. C. Roesler, D. Y. Hall, and Z. W. Petzel. Gender inequality


in academia: Problems and solutions for women faculty in STEM. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 99:13–23, 2021.


## 19. H. F. Chan and B. Torgler. Gender differences in performance of top cited scientists by field and country. Scientometrics,


125:2421–2447, 2020.


## 20. M. De Paola and V. Scoppa. Gender discrimination and evaluators’ gender: Evidence from italian academia. Economica,


82(325):162–188, 2015.


## 21. T. Deryugina, O. Shurchkov, and J. Stearns. COVID-19 disruptions disproportionately affect female academics. AEA


Papers and Proceedings, 111:164–68, 2021.

14/31




## 22. M. L. Dion, J. L. Sumner, and S. M. Mitchell. Gendered citation patterns across political science and social science



## methodology fields. Political Analysis, 26:312–327, 2018.



## 23. J. D. Dworkin, K. A. Linn, E. G. Teich, P. Zurn, R. T. Shinohara, and D. S. Bassett. The extent and drivers of gender


imbalance in neuroscience reference lists. Nature Neuroscience, 23:918–926, 2020.


## 24. J. El-Ouahi and V. Larivière. On the lack of women researchers in the Middle East & North Africa. arXiv preprint


arXiv:2208.13520, 2022.


## 25. Elsevier. Gender report 2020: The researcher journey through a gender lens, 2020. https://www.elsevier.com/


connect/gender-report#report-2020 (Accessed January 2023).


## 26. Elsevier. Gender in the Portugal research arena: A case study in European leadership, 2021. https://www.elsevier.


com/connect/gender-report#portugal (Accessed January 2023).


## 27. D. K. Evans, M. Akmal, and P. Jakiela. Gender gaps in education: The long view. IZA Journal of Development and


Migration, 12:1–27, 2021.


## 28. A. Evers and M. Sieverding. Academic career intention beyond the phd: can the theory of planned behavior explain


gender differences? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 45:158–172, 2015.


## 29. M. A. Ferber. Citations and networking. Gender & Society, 2:82–89, 1988.



## 30. A. A. Ferreira, M. A. Gonçalves, and A. H. F. Laender. A brief survey of automatic methods for author name disambigua-


tion. SIGMOD Record, 41:15–26, 2012.


## 31. C. W. Fox, C. S. Burns, and J. A. Meyer. Editor and reviewer gender influence the peer review process but not peer review


outcomes at an ecology journal. Functional Ecology, 30:140–153, 2016.


## 32. J. M. Fulvio, I. Akinnola, and B. R. Postle. Gender (im)balance in citation practices in cognitive neuroscience. Journal of


Cognitive Neuroscience, 33:3–7, 2021.


## 33. C. J. Gomez, A. C. Herman, and P. Parigi. Leading countries in global science increasingly receive more citations than


other countries doing similar research. Nature Human Behaviour, 6:919–929, 2022.


## 34. D. M. Hafeez, A. Waqas, S. Majeed, S. Naveed, K. I. Afzal, Z. Aftab, M. Zeshan, and F. Khosa. Gender distribution in


psychiatry journals’ editorial boards worldwide. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 94:152119, 2019.


## 35. M. Haghani, A. Abbasi, C. C. Zwack, Z. Shahhoseini, and N. Haslam. Trends of research productivity across author


gender and research fields: A multidisciplinary and multi-country observational study. PLOS ONE, 17:e0271998, 2022.


## 36. T. Heinze, A. Jappe, and D. Pithan. From North American hegemony to global competition for scientific leadership?


Insights from the Nobel population. PLOS ONE, 14:e0213916, 2019.


## 37. M. Helmer, M. Schottdorf, A. Neef, and D. Battaglia. Gender bias in scholarly peer review. eLife, 6:e21718, 2017.



## 38. E. B. Holliday, R. Jagsi, L. D. Wilson, M. Choi, C. R. Thomas Jr, and C. D. Fuller. Gender differences in publication


productivity, academic position, career duration and funding among US academic radiation oncology faculty. Academic

medicine: journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges, 89:767, 2014.


## 39. L. Holman, D. Stuart-Fox, and C. E. Hauser. The gender gap in science: How long until women are equally represented?


PLOS Biology, 16:e2004956, 2018.


## 40. J. Huang, A. J. Gates, R. Sinatra, and A.-L. Barabási. Historical comparison of gender inequality in scientific careers


across countries and disciplines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,

117:4609–4616, 2020.


## 41. M. Jadidi, F. Karimi, H. Lietz, and C. Wagner. Gender disparities in science? Dropout, productivity, collaborations and


success of male and female computer scientists. Advances in Complex Systems, 21:1750011, 2018.


## 42. F. Karimi, C. Wagner, F. Lemmerich, M. Jadidi, and M. Strohmaier. Inferring gender from names on the Web: A


comparative evaluation of gender detection methods. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on

World Wide Web, pages 53–54, 2016.


## 43. L. Kim, D. S. Smith, B. Hofstra, and D. A. McFarland. Gendered knowledge in fields and academic careers. Research


Policy, 51:104411, 2022.


## 44. M. M. King, C. T. Bergstrom, S. J. Correll, J. Jacquet, and J. D. West. Men set their own cites high: Gender and


self-citation across fields and over time. Socius, 3:2378023117738903, 2017.

15/31




## 45. H. Kong, S. Martin-Gutierrez, and F. Karimi. Influence of the first-mover advantage on the gender disparities in physics


citations. Communications Physics, 5:243, 2022.


## 46. D. Kozlowski, V. Larivière, C. R. Sugimoto, and T. Monroe-White. Intersectional inequalities in science. Proceedings of


the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 119:e2113067119, 2022.


## 47. D. Kozlowski, D. S. Murray, A. Bell, W. Hulsey, V. Larivière, T. Monroe-White, and C. R. Sugimoto. Avoiding bias


when inferring race using name-based approaches. PLOS ONE, 17:1–16, 2022.


## 48. M. Kwiek and W. Roszka. Gender-based homophily in research: A large-scale study of man-woman collaboration.


Journal of Informetrics, 15:101171, 2021.


## 49. M. Kwiek and W. Roszka. Gender disparities in international research collaboration: A study of 25,000 university


professors. Journal of Economic Surveys, 35:1344–1380, 2021.


## 50. V. Larivière, C. Ni, Y. Gingras, B. Cronin, and C. R. Sugimoto. Bibliometrics: Global gender disparities in science.


Nature, 504:211–213, 2013.


## 51. J. Lau. South Korea sets 25 per cent target for female professors, 2020. https://www.timeshighereducation.


com/news/south-korea-sets-25-cent-target-female-professors (Accessed January 2023).


## 52. M. J. Lerchenmueller and O. Sorenson. The gender gap in early career transitions in the life sciences. Research Policy,


47:1007–1017, 2018.


## 53. K. Lerman, Y. Yu, F. Morstatter, and J. Pujara. Gendered citation patterns among the scientific elite. Proceedings of the


National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 119:e2206070119, 2022.


## 54. W. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Zheng, S. J. Cranmer, and A. Clauset. Untangling the network effects of productivity and prominence


among scientists. Nature Communications, 13:4907, 2022.


## 55. G. Liang, H. Hou, Y. Ding, and Z. Hu. Knowledge recency to the birth of Nobel prize-winning articles: Gender, career


stage, and country. Journal of Informetrics, 14:101053, 2020.


## 56. A. E. Lincoln, S. Pincus, J. B. Koster, and P. S. Leboy. The Matilda effect in science: Awards and prizes in the US, 1990s


and 2000s. Social Studies of Science, 42:307–320, 2012.


## 57. F. Liu, P. Holme, M. Chiesa, B. AlShebli, and T. Rahwan. Gender inequality and self-publication are common among


academic editors. Nature Human Behaviour, 7:353–364, 2023.


## 58. F. Liu, T. Rahwan, and B. AlShebli. Non-white scientists appear on fewer editorial boards, spend more time under


review, and receive fewer citations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,

120:e2215324120, 2023.


## 59. A. Llorens, A. Tzovara, L. Bellier, I. Bhaya-Grossman, A. Bidet-Caulet, W. K. Chang, Z. R. Cross, R. Dominguez-Faus,


A. Flinker, Y. Fonken, M. A. Gorenstein, C. Holdgraf, C. W. Hoy, M. V. Ivanova, R. T. Jimenez, S. Jun, J. W. Kam,

C. Kidd, E. Marcelle, D. Marciano, S. Martin, N. E. Myers, K. Ojala, A. Perry, P. Pinheiro-Chagas, S. K. Riès, I. Saez,

I. Skelin, K. Slama, B. Staveland, D. S. Bassett, E. A. Buffalo, A. L. Fairhall, N. J. Kopell, L. J. Kray, J. J. Lin, A. C.

Nobre, D. Riley, A.-K. Solbakk, J. D. Wallis, X.-J. Wang, S. Yuval-Greenberg, S. Kastner, R. T. Knight, and N. F.

Dronkers. Gender bias in academia: A lifetime problem that needs solutions. Neuron, 109:2047–2074, 2021.


## 60. J. W. Lockhart, M. M. King, and C. Munsch. Name-based demographic inference and the unequal distribution of


misrecognition. Nature Human Behaviour, 7(7):1084–1095, 2023.


## 61. P. Lunnemann, M. H. Jensen, and L. Jauffred. Gender bias in Nobel prizes. Palgrave Communications, 5:46, 2019.



## 62. Y. Ma, Y. Zhao, X. Gong, L. Sun, and Y. Zheng. Close the gender gap in Chinese science. Nature, 557:25–27, 2018.



## 63. B. Macaluso, V. Larivière, T. Sugimoto, and C. R. Sugimoto. Is science built on the shoulders of women? A study of


gender differences in contributorship. Academic Medicine, 91:1136–1142, 2016.


## 64. A. McDaniel. Cross-national gender gaps in educational expectations: The influence of national-level gender ideology


and educational systems. Comparative Education Review, 54:27–50, 2010.


## 65. L. I. Meho. The gender gap in highly prestigious international research awards, 2001—2020. Quantitative Science


Studies, 2:976–989, 2021.


## 66. L. I. Meho. Gender gap among highly cited researchers, 2014–2021. Quantitative Science Studies, 3:1003–1023, 2022.



## 67. A. Minello, S. Martucci, and L. K. C. Manzo. The pandemic and the academic mothers: present hardships and future


perspectives. European Societies, 23:S82–S94, 2021.

16/31




## 68. B. Molony, J. Theiss, and H. Choi. Gender in modern East Asia. Routledge, Oxfordshire, UK, 2016.



## 69. A. C. Morgan, S. F. Way, M. J. D. Hoefer, D. B. Larremore, M. Galesic, and A. Clauset. The unequal impact of parenthood


in academia. Science Advances, 7:eabd1996, 2021.


## 70. C. A. Moss-Racusin, J. F. Dovidio, V. L. Brescoll, M. J. Graham, and J. Handelsman. Science faculty’s subtle gender biases


favor male students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109:16474–16479,

2012.


## 71. C. A. Moss-Racusin, J. F. Dovidio, V. L. Brescoll, M. J. Graham, and J. Handelsman. Science faculty’s subtle gender biases


favor male students. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109:16474–16479,

2012.


## 72. D. Murray, K. Siler, V. Larivière, W. M. Chan, A. M. Collings, J. Raymond, and C. R. Sugimoto. Author-reviewer


homophily in peer review. bioRxiv, 2019.


## 73. K. R. Myers, W. Y. Tham, Y. Yin, N. Cohodes, J. G. Thursby, M. C. Thursby, P. Schiffer, J. T. Walsh, K. R. Lakhani, and


D. Wang. Unequal effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on scientists. Nature Human Behaviour, 4:880–883, 2020.


## 74. National Institute of Science and Technology Policy. Digest of Japanese science and technology indicators 2022, 2022.


https://www.nistep.go.jp/en/?p=5315 (Accessed January 2023).


## 75. R. Nunkoo, C. M. Hall, S. Rughoobur-Seetah, and V. Teeroovengadum. Citation practices in tourism research: Toward a


gender conscientious engagement. Annals of Tourism Research, 79:102755, 2019.


## 76. M. Okanda, X. Meng, Y. Kanakogi, M. Uragami, H. Yamamoto, and Y. Moriguchi. Gender stereotypes about intellectual


ability in Japanese children. Scientific Reports, 12:16748, 2022.


## 77. N. Osumi. Calling rikejo, 2018. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-02906-1 (Accessed


January 2023).


## 78. E. R. Palser, M. Lazerwitz, and A. Fotopoulou. Gender and geographical disparity in editorial boards of journals in


psychology and neuroscience. Nature Neuroscience, 25:272–279, 2022.


## 79. R. K. Pan, K. Kaski, and S. Fortunato. World citation and collaboration networks: Uncovering the role of geography in


science. Scientific Reports, 2:902, 2012.


## 80. J. Paswan and V. K. Singh. Gender and research publishing analyzed through the lenses of discipline, institution types,


impact and international collaboration: A case study from India. Scientometrics, 123:497–515, 2020.


## 81. S. J. Pharr. Political women in Japan: The search for a place in political life. University of California Press, Berkeley,


California, 1981.


## 82. J. Priem, H. Piwowar, and R. Orr. OpenAlex: A fully-open index of scholarly works, authors, venues, institutions, and


concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01833, 2022.


## 83. J. M. Raymo, H. Park, Y. Xie, and W.-j. J. Yeung. Marriage and family in East Asia: Continuity and change. Annual


Review of Sociology, 41:471–492, 2015.


## 84. M. B. Ross, B. M. Glennon, R. Murciano-Goroff, E. G. Berkes, B. A. Weinberg, and J. I. Lane. Women are credited less


in science than men. Nature, 608:135–145, 2022.


## 85. S. M. Ruzycki, S. Fletcher, M. Earp, A. Bharwani, and K. C. Lithgow. Trends in the Proportion of Female Speakers at


Medical Conferences in the United States and in Canada, 2007 to 2017. JAMA Network Open, 2:e192103–e192103, 2019.


## 86. L. Santamaría and H. Mihaljevi´c. Comparison and benchmark of name-to-gender inference services. PeerJ Computer


Science, 4:e156, 2018.


## 87. E. Sebastián-González, E. Graciá, A. Morán-Ordóñez, I. Pérez-Ibarra, A. Sanz-Aguilar, and M. Sobral. Ten simple rules


for a mom-friendly academia. PLOS Computational Biology, 19:e1011284, 2023.


## 88. J. M. Sheltzer and J. C. Smith. Elite male faculty in the life sciences employ fewer women. Proceedings of the National


Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111:10107–10112, 2014.


## 89. J. C. Shin, G. A. Postiglione, and K. C. Ho. Challenges for doctoral education in East Asia: A global and comparative


perspective. Asia Pacific Education Review, 19:141–155, 2018.


## 90. F. Squazzoni, G. Bravo, M. Farjam, A. Marusic, B. Mehmani, M. Willis, A. Birukou, P. Dondio, and F. Grimaldo. Peer


review and gender bias: A study on 145 scholarly journals. Science Advances, 7:eabd0299, 2021.

17/31




## 91. R. E. Steinpreis, K. A. Anders, and D. Ritzke. The impact of gender on the review of the curricula vitae of job applicants


and tenure candidates: A national empirical study. Sex Roles, 41:509–528, 1999.


## 92. J. L. Sumner. The gender balance assessment tool (GBAT): A web-based tool for estimating gender balance in syllabi and


bibliographies. PS: Political Science & Politics, 51:396–400, 2018.


## 93. L. Tang, P. Shapira, and J. Youtie. Is there a clubbing effect underlying Chinese research citation increases? Journal of


the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66:1923–1932, 2015.


## 94. E. G. Teich, J. Z. Kim, C. W. Lynn, S. C. Simon, A. A. Klishin, K. P. Szymula, P. Srivastava, L. C. Bassett, P. Zurn, J. D.


Dworkin, and D. S. Bassett. Citation inequity and gendered citation practices in contemporary physics. Nature Physics,

18:1161–1170, 2022.


## 95. A. Tekles, K. Auspurg, and L. Bornmann. Same-gender citations do not indicate a substantial gender homophily bias.


PLOS ONE, 17:1–12, 2022.


## 96. The World Bank. Research and development expenditure (% of GDP), 2022. https://data.worldbank.org/


indicator/GB.XPD.RSDV.GD.ZS (Accessed January 2023).


## 97. M. Thelwall. Female citation impact superiority 1996–2018 in six out of seven English-speaking nations. Journal of the


Association for Information Science and Technology, 71:979–990, 2020.


## 98. M. Thelwall, C. Bailey, M. Makita, P. Sud, and D. P. Madalli. Gender and research publishing in India: Uniformly high


inequality? Journal of Informetrics, 13:118–131, 2019.


## 99. Times Higher Education. World university rankings 2023, 2023. https://www.timeshighereducation.com/


world-university-rankings/2023/world-ranking (Accessed January 2023).


## 100. I. Van Buskirk, A. Clauset, and D. B. Larremore. An open-source cultural consensus approach to name-based gender


classification. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 17:866–877, 2023.


## 101. P. van den Besselaar and U. Sandström. Gender differences in research performance and its impact on careers: A


longitudinal case study. Scientometrics, 106:143–162, 2016.


## 102. M. Visser, N. J. van Eck, and L. Waltman. Large-scale comparison of bibliographic data sources: Scopus, Web of Science,


Dimensions, Crossref, and Microsoft Academic. Quantitative Science Studies, 2:20–41, 2021.


## 103. X. Wang, J. D. Dworkin, D. Zhou, J. Stiso, E. B. Falk, D. S. Bassett, P. Zurn, and D. M. Lydon-Staley. Gendered citation


practices in the field of communication. Annals of the International Communication Association, 45:134–153, 2021.


## 104. S. Webber, K. Nackers, M. M. Kelly, C. L. Nacht, K. Tiedt, A. Allen, J. Eickhoff, and J. C. Babal. Gender-based linguistic



## analysis of pediatric clinical faculty evaluations. Academic Pediatrics, 22:324–331, 2022.



## 105. J. D. West, J. Jacquet, M. M. King, S. J. Correll, and C. T. Bergstrom. The role of gender in scholarly authorship. PLOS


ONE, 8:e66212, 2013.


## 106. H. O. Witteman, M. Hendricks, S. Straus, and C. Tannenbaum. Are gender gaps due to evaluations of the applicant or the


science? A natural experiment at a national funding agency. Lancet, 393:531–540, 2019.


## 107. World Economic Forum.


Global gender gap report 2022, 2022.

https://www.weforum.org/reports/

global-gender-gap-report-2022 (Accessed January 2023).


## 108. World Intellectual Property Organization. Global innovation index 2022, 2022. https://www.wipo.int/global_


innovation_index/en/2022/ (Accessed January 2023).


## 109. E. O. Wright, J. Baxter, and G. E. Birkelund. The gender gap in workplace authority: A cross-national study. American


Sociological Review, 60:407–435, 1995.


## 110. Y. Xie and K. A. Shauman. Sex differences in research productivity: New evidence about an old puzzle. American


Sociological Review, 63:847–870, 1998.


## 111. Y. Xie, C. Zhang, and Q. Lai. China’s rise as a major contributor to science and technology. Proceedings of the National


Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111:9437–9442, 2014.


## 112. Y. Yang, T. Y. Tian, T. K. Woodruff, B. F. Jones, and B. Uzzi. Gender-diverse teams produce more novel and higher-impact


scientific ideas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 119:e2200841119,

2022.


## 113. J. Ye, S. Han, Y. Hu, B. Coskun, M. Liu, H. Qin, and S. Skiena. Nationality classification using name embeddings. In


Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, page 1897–1906, 2017.

18/31




## 114. H. Zheng, W. Li, and D. Wang. Expertise diversity of teams predicts originality and long-term impact in science and


technology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04422, 2022.


## 115. X. Zheng, J. Chen, E. Yan, and C. Ni. Gender and country biases in Wikipedia citations to scholarly publications. Journal


of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 74:219–233, 2023.


## 116. X. Zheng, H. Yuan, and C. Ni. How parenthood contributes to gender gaps in academia. eLife, 11:e78909, 2022.



## 117. D. Zhou, E. J. Cornblath, J. Stiso, E. G. Teich, J. D. Dworkin, A. S. Blevins, and D. S. Bassett. Gender diversity statement


and code notebook v1.0, 2020.


## 118. P. Zhou and L. Leydesdorff. The emergence of China as a leading nation in science. Research Policy, 35:83–104, 2006.



## 119. P. Zurn, E. G. Teich, S. C. Simon, J. Z. Kim, and D. S. Bassett. Supporting academic equity in physics through citation


diversity. Communications Physics, 5:240, 2022.

19/31



Supplementary Materials for:

Quantifying gender imbalance in East Asian academia: Research career and citation

practice

Kazuki Nakajima, Ruodan Liu, Kazuyuki Shudo, and Naoki Masuda

S1 Research discipline of papers and authors

Each paper in our data set is associated with at least one concept. There are 65,073 concepts in the data set, which form a

six-level tree structure from level 0 to 5. Lower-level concepts are more general, and higher-level concepts are more specific. For

example, if we traverse downward the tree structure from the “computer science” concept at level 0, we find a level-5 concept

named “Java bytecode”. There are 19 concepts at level 0 (i.e., art, biology, business, chemistry, computer science, economics,

engineering, environmental science, geography, geology, history, materials science, mathematics, medicine, philosophy, physics,

political science, psychology, and sociology). We use the level-0 concepts as research disciplines.

We assigned one research discipline to each paper z as follows. We first count the frequency of each discipline by fully

traversing the tree upward from each of the z’s concepts to level 0. If the most frequent discipline is unique, we assign it to z.

Otherwise, we exclude z from the data set.

Then, we assigned one research discipline to each author u based on u’s papers. We first count the frequency of each

research discipline across all papers authored by u. If the most frequent discipline is unique, we assign it to u. Otherwise, we

do not assign any discipline to u.

S2 Country with which the author is affiliated

We assigned a single country to each author u based on u’s affiliation as follows. The country code (i.e., the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2

country code) is available for most affiliations (i.e., 99.1%) present in our data set. Therefore, we first counted the frequency

with which each country appears in u’s affiliation over all papers authored by u. Note that u’s affiliation data may be missing

for some papers authored by u. Then, if the most frequent country is unique, we assign it to u. Otherwise, we exclude u from

the data set.

S3 Assessing the accuracy of gender assignment

S3.1 Six baseline methods and classification accuracy

In response to a first name given as input, Gender API returns either ‘female’, ‘male’, or ‘unknown’, its ‘accuracy’ (which is a

terminology of Gender API and different from the classification accuracy on the test set discussed below; therefore we put

the quotation marks here and in the following text), and the number of samples of the given first name in the database. The

country name is an optional input to Gender API. Our gender assignment method using Gender API consists of (i) whether or

not we input the author’s country name, (ii) the threshold on the ‘accuracy’, denoted by θ, such that the API’s outputs with

an ‘accuracy’ less than θ are discarded, and (iii) the threshold on the number of samples, denoted by ns, such that the API’s

outputs with less than ns samples are discarded.

To assess the classification accuracy of a gender assignment method, we manually checked the correctness of the assigned

gender of sampled authors as follows. We first classified the authors that have at least one candidate of the first name into

four groups, i.e., China, Japan, South Korea, and the other countries, according to their country. Second, we classified the

authors in each country group into the following four subgroups according to the year of their first publication: (i) 1990 or

before, (ii) between 1991 and 2000, (iii) between 2001 and 2010, and (iv) between 2011 and 2020. Third, we selected the top

25 authors in terms of the number of published papers for each gender, each of the four country groups, and each of the four

year subgroups, which yielded 100 females and 100 males for each country group. Then, we searched their publicly available

electronic materials (e.g., curriculum vitae, profiles on social networking services, and web pages with face photos) based on

their name and affiliation to manually label each of these authors either “female”, “male”, and “N/A”. The second author (i.e.,

RL), who is native speaker of Chinese, carried out this task for China. The first author (i.e., KN), who is native speaker of

20/31



Japanese, carried out this task for the other three country groups. Their gender assignment decision is admittedly subjective.

Label “N/A” indicates that we could not find sufficient online materials for the author to judge their gender.

Our goal is to find a gender assignment method that yields a classification accuracy of at least 90% for each gender, each

country group, and each year subgroup. For each country group, we first examined six baseline methods: “Global”, “Local”,

“Hybrid”, “Globalα”, “Localα”, and “Hybridα”. In the Global method, for each author, we feed each candidate of their first

name to the API without specifying their country. Then, among the API’s outputs, we kept only the outputs for which the

‘accuracy’ that the API returns is at least θ and the number of samples is at least ns. We set θ = 90% and ns = 1. We then find

the largest ‘accuracy’ value among all the input first-name candidates that return female as output. Similarly, we find the largest

‘accuracy’ value among all the input first-name candidates that return male as output. If the former is larger than the latter, we

assign female to the author. If the former is smaller than the latter, we assign male to the author. If the former is equal to the

latter, then we do not assign any gender to the author.

The only difference between the Global, Local, and Hybrid methods is the inputs to the API. In the Local method, for

each author, we feed each candidate of their first name to the API but not their country. In the Hybrid method, for each author,

we feed each candidate of their first name to the API without specifying their country, and then we again feed the same first

name to the API by specifying their country. Moreover, we define the Globalα, Localα, and Hybridα methods by changing

ns = 1 to ns = 10 in the Global, Local, and Hybrid methods, respectively. Raising ns may improve the classification accuracy;

the same technique was used before2,4. The method with the best classification accuracy among the six baseline methods

does not reach 90% classification accuracy for some pairs of the country group and year subgroup. In this case, we examine

additional methods in which we separately adjust θ or ns just for the pairs with low classification accuracy, as we describe in

the remainder of this section, until the classification accuracy reaches 90% in all the cases.

S3.2 Authors in China

We found that the Local method yields the highest classification accuracy on average over the eight subgroups (i.e., four year

subgroups for each gender) among the Global, Local, and Hybrid methods (see Table S1). The Local method inferred the gender

of male authors in each year subgroup with more than 90% classification accuracy. However, the classification accuracy for the

females with the same method was much lower than 90%. Then, we additionally considered Globalα, Localα, and Hybridα.

These variants improve the classification accuracy, and Localα yields the highest average of the classification accuracy over the

eight subgroups (see Table S1). However, the classification accuracy of Localα is still much lower than 90% for the females

whose first publication year is 1991 or later.

Therefore, we considered three additional variants of Localα, named Localβ, Localγ, and Localδ. Localβ is the same

as Localα except that, in Localβ, we set θ = 95% for the authors whose first publication year is 1991 or later. Then, the

classification accuracy for the females whose first publication year is 2011 or later is higher than 90%; however, that for the

females whose first publication year is between 1991 and 2010 is not (see Table S1). Next, we considered Localγ, which is

the same as Localβ except that Localγ uses θ = 99% for the authors whose first publication year is between 1991 and 2010.

With Localγ, the classification accuracy for the females whose first publication year is between 1991 and 2000 is higher than

90%; however, that for the females whose first publication year is between 2001 and 2010 is not (see Table S1). Therefore, we

considered Localδ, which is the same as Localγ except that Localδ uses ns = 50 for the females whose first publication year is

between 2001 and 2010. Then, the classification accuracy for the females whose first publication year is between 2001 and

2010 is higher than 90% (see Table S1). Therefore, we used Localδ, which yields at least 90% classification accuracy for the

females and males in each year subgroup.

S3.3 Authors in Japan

For the authors in Japan, Localα yielded the highest average of the classification accuracy over the eight subgroups among the

six baseline methods. Localα detected the gender of the males in each year subgroup and of the females whose first publication

year is 1991 or later with more than 90% accuracy (see Table S2). However, the classification accuracy for the females whose

first publication year is 1990 or before is much smaller than 90% with Localα.

Therefore, we considered two additional variants of Localα, named Localε and Localζ. In Localε, we changed Localα

by setting θ = 95% just for the authors whose first publication year is 1990 or before. We found that, with Localε, the

classification accuracy for the females whose first publication year is 1990 or before is still lower than 90% (see Table S2).

In Localζ, we changed Localε by setting θ = 99% just for the authors whose first publication year is 1990 or before. The

classification accuracy with Localζ is higher than 90% for the females whose first publication year is 1990 or before (see Table

S2). Therefore, we used Localζ, which yields at least 90% classification accuracy for the females and males in each year

subgroup.

21/31



S3.4 Authors in South Korea

For the authors in South Korea, Localα yielded the highest average of the classification accuracy over the eight subgroups

among the six baseline methods, which was higher than 90% for the females and males in each year subgroup (see Table S3).

Therefore, we used Localα.

S3.5 Authors in the other countries

For the authors in the other countries, Global and Globalα yielded the highest average of the classification accuracy over the

eight subgroups among the six baseline methods. Both methods yielded an classification accuracy higher than 90% for the

females and males in each subgroup (see Table S4). Note that Globalα yielded exactly the same classification accuracy for the

females and males in each subgroup as Global because all the 200 sampled authors have first names that have more than ten

samples in the database. As we did for the authors in China, Japan, and South Korea, and as previous studies also did2,4, we

decided to use Globalα for the authors in the other countries.

S4 Citation count and its normalization

We count and normalize the number of citations that each paper has received using the method proposed in Ref.1 as follows.

For each paper z, we first count the number of citations received by z within 10 years after its publication without self-citations

(i.e., citations to the papers whose authors overlap those of z). Then, we define the citation impact of z as the number of citations

divided by the average number of citations received by the papers published in the same year.

S5 Fraction of female authors by research discipline

Table S5 shows the number of gender-assigned authors and the fraction of female authors in China, Japan, South Korea, and the

other countries by author’s research discipline.

S6 Statistical significance of gender gap in research career

We run the unpaired two-tailed Welch’s t-test for the combination of an indicator and a set of authors, as was done in Ref.1.

The t-test decides whether the female and male authors in the set, which have unequal sample sizes and unequal variances

of the indicator, deviate from the null hypothesis that the female and male authors have the same mean of the indicator. For

the female authors in the set, we denote by nF, µF, and sF the number of samples, the sample mean of the indicator, and the

corrected sample standard deviation of the indicator, respectively. Similarly, we denote the corresponding quantities for the

male authors by nM, µM, and sM. Then, we calculate the t-statistic given by

t =

µF −µM

q

,

(1)

s2

F

nF +

q

s2

M

nM

the p-value of the obtained t-statistic against the null hypothesis, and the 95% confidence interval (CI) of µF −µM. We use

‘t.test’ function from ‘stats’ package in R3 to calculate the t-statistic, p-value, and CI.

Tables S6, S7, S8, and S9 show the results of the unpaired two-tailed Welch’s t-test for the authors in China, Japan, South

Korea, and the other countries. The p-values less than 0.001 in these tables remain significant after the Bonferroni correction at

a significance level of 0.05 because there are 42 comparisons in total in these four tables.

S7 Matching experiments for the papers in which the authors occupy the prominent

position

Figure S1 shows the results for the matching experiments in which we restrict the analysis to the papers in which the authors

occupy the prominent author position.

S8 Correlation between author’s career length and number of coauthors

Table S10 shows the Pearson correlation coefficients between the career length and the number of coauthors for the set of all

the authors, that of female authors, and that of male authors in each country group.

S9 Gender imbalance in domestic and foreign citations

Figure S2 shows the over/under-citations for domestic citations made by papers from China, Japan, and South Korea. Figure S3

shows the corresponding results for foreign citations.

22/31



Supplementary References


## 1. J. Huang, A. J. Gates, R. Sinatra, and A.-L. Barabási. Historical comparison of gender inequality in scientific careers across


countries and disciplines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 117:4609–4616,

2020.


## 2. L. I. Meho. Gender gap among highly cited researchers, 2014–2021. Quantitative Science Studies, 3:1003–1023, 2022.



## 3. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,


Austria, 2022.


## 4. M. Thelwall. Female citation impact superiority 1996–2018 in six out of seven English-speaking nations. Journal of the


Association for Information Science and Technology, 71:979–990, 2020.

23/31



Table S1. Classification accuracy of the different gender assignment methods for the authors in China. In each cell, we report

the classification accuracy for female and male authors in red and blue, respectively. The number after the classification

accuracy shows the number of authors among the 25 selected authors for whom we were able to manually assign the binary

gender.


## Method


Year of the first publication

1990 or before

1991–2000

2001–2010

2011–2020

Global

64.0% (25)

48.0% (25)

54.1% (24)

73.9% (23)

95.8% (24)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (24)

Local

72.0% (25)

60.0% (25)

65.2% (23)

84.0% (25)

100% (21)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

Hybrid

68.0% (25)

36.0% (25)

56.5% (23)

68.0% (25)

100% (22)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

Globalα

84.0% (25)

88.0% (25)

66.6% (24)

69.5% (23)

95.6% (23)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (24)

Localα

92.0% (25)

88.0% (25)

78.2% (23)

87.5% (24)

100% (21)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

Hybridα

80.0% (25)

88.0% (25)

73.9% (23)

72.0% (25)

100% (22)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (24)

Localβ

92.0% (25)

84.0% (25)

82.6% (23)

95.8% (24)

100% (21)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

Localγ

92.0% (25)

92.0% (25)

83.3% (24)

95.8% (24)

100% (21)

96.0% (25)

95.8% (24)

100% (25)

Localδ

92.0% (25)

92.0% (25)

96.0% (25)

95.8% (24)

100% (21)

96.0% (25)

95.8% (24)

100% (25)

Table S2. Classification accuracy of the different gender assignment methods for the authors in Japan.


## Method


Year of the first publication

1990 or before

1991–2000

2001–2010

2011–2020

Global

48.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

87.5% (24)

90.4% (21)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (25)

Local

56.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

91.6% (24)

91.6% (24)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

Hybrid

48.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

83.3% (24)

87.5% (24)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

Globalα

56.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

87.5% (24)

95.2% (21)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (25)

Localα

64.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

95.8% (24)

91.3% (23)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

Hybridα

56.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

87.5% (24)

87.5% (24)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

Localε

76.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

95.8% (24)

91.3% (23)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

Localζ

92.0% (25)

91.6% (24)

95.8% (24)

91.3% (23)

100% (25)

100% (24)

100% (22)

100% (24)

24/31



Table S3. Classification accuracy of the different gender assignment methods for the authors in South Korea.


## Method


Year of the first publication

1990 or before

1991–2000

2001–2010

2011–2020

Global

75.0% (24)

83.3% (24)

78.2% (23)

100% (22)

100% (23)

100% (25)

95.8% (24)

90.9% (22)

Local

69.5% (23)

75.0% (24)

73.9% (23)

100% (22)

100% (23)

100% (25)

95.8% (24)

86.3% (22)

Hybrid

70.8% (24)

75.0% (24)

73.9% (23)

100% (23)

100% (23)

100% (25)

95.8% (24)

90.9% (22)

Globalα

91.3% (23)

95.8% (24)

95.8% (24)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (24)

100% (24)

91.6% (24)

Localα

95.6% (23)

95.8% (24)

91.6% (24)

100% (25)

100% (23)

100% (25)

100% (24)

91.6% (24)

Hybridα

95.6% (23)

95.8% (24)

91.6% (24)

100% (25)

100% (23)

100% (25)

100% (24)

87.5% (24)

Table S4. Classification accuracy of the different gender assignment methods for the authors in the other countries.


## Method


Year of the first publication

1990 or before

1991–2000

2001–2010

2011–2020

Global

91.6% (24)

96.0% (25)

100% (24)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (21)

Local

79.1% (24)

95.8% (24)

86.9% (23)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (20)

Hybrid

79.1% (24)

95.8% (24)

86.9% (23)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (21)

Globalα

91.6% (24)

96.0% (25)

100% (24)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (21)

Localα

79.1% (24)

100% (24)

86.9% (23)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (21)

Hybridα

79.1% (24)

100% (24)

86.9% (23)

96.0% (25)

100% (25)

100% (25)

100% (22)

100% (21)

25/31



Table S5. The number of authors by research discipline and country. In each cell, we report the number of gender-assigned

authors and the fraction of female authors.

Discipline

Country

China

Japan

South Korea

Other countries

Art

568 (25.7%)

981 (21.7%)

191 (28.6%)

206,721 (47.3%)

Biology

73,842 (20.7%)

221,154 (29.9%)

49,992 (27.3%)

3,051,331 (46.0%)

Business

2,471 (16.7%)

2,565 (26.5%)

1,643 (15.9%)

157,736 (38.2%)

Chemistry

46,771 (14.4%)

185,064 (26.3%)

30,485 (17.8%)

1,240,700 (35.8%)

Computer science

60,372 (7.4%)

92,593 (16.3%)

39,646 (8.1%)

1,299,940 (23.1%)

Economics

4,356 (12.7%)

6,215 (21.6%)

2,517 (13.8%)

266,161 (29.9%)

Engineering

18,992 (4.3%)

33,866 (11.8%)

13,854 (4.9%)

389,108 (17.8%)

Environmental science

327 (7.6%)

1,153 (22.3%)

119 (13.3%)

19,905 (33.2%)

Geography

1,672 (11.6%)

4,207 (22.7%)

415 (15.3%)

94,890 (38.0%)

Geology

7,971 (7.3%)

16,838 (14.5%)

2,377 (11.4%)

245,045 (25.7%)

History

406 (14.4%)

933 (25.4%)

153 (20.8%)

64,286 (33.9%)

Materials science

25,062 (6.8%)

76,712 (16.8%)

29,290 (6.6%)

397,460 (24.3%)

Mathematics

12,509 (7.9%)

17,798 (21.1%)

4,603 (7.1%)

293,951 (21.5%)

Medicine

66,683 (14.5%)

377,948 (29.2%)

113,489 (19.7%)

5,096,696 (42.9%)

Philosophy

1,039 (20.8%)

2,476 (26.8%)

384 (20.2%)

187,240 (38.7%)

Physics

31,763 (6.0%)

134,033 (15.3%)

27,085 (6.2%)

843,370 (17.6%)

Political science

2,975 (14.8%)

4,092 (22.6%)

1,213 (21.8%)

391,284 (40.2%)

Psychology

4,687 (32.2%)

17,517 (38.8%)

3,647 (34.5%)

635,784 (55.7%)

Sociology

468 (26.8%)

1,155 (37.2%)

209 (33.4%)

109,660 (57.2%)

Table S6. Statistical significance of the gender gap in the research career for the authors in China. We did not run the t-test for

the cells with ‘N/A’ because all authors in the group have the same value of the indicator.

Indicator

Group

µF

µM

t-statistic

p-value

95% CI of µF −µM

Overall

4.47

4.93

−4.27

< 0.00100

(−0.670, −0.248)

Top 20%

10.4

12.7

−5.36

< 0.00100

(−3.24, −1.50)

Middle 20%

3.19

3.13

3.62

< 0.00100

(0.0263, 0.0886)

Low 20%

2.00

2.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Productivity

Overall

10.1

7.31

6.80

< 0.00100

(1.96, 3.55)

Top 20%

34.4

28.5

3.48

< 0.00100

(2.54, 9.11)

Middle 20%

4.47

1.97

67.3

< 0.00100

(2.42, 2.57)

Low 20%

0.414

0.0134

32.8

< 0.00100

(0.376, 0.424)

Total impact

Overall

1.74

1.69

2.52

0.0123

(0.0123, 0.0989)

Top 20%

3.57

3.48

1.57

0.116

(−0.0203, 0.185)

Middle 20%

1.51

1.46

8.04

< 0.00100

(0.0335, 0.0551)

Low 20%

0.550

0.510

4.74

< 0.00100

(0.0234, 0.0565)

Annual productivity

Overall

3.24

3.68

−4.99

< 0.00100

(−0.603, −0.263)

Top 20%

9.79

11.3

−5.22

< 0.00100

(−2.08, −0.945)

Middle 20%

1.78

1.93

−9.33

< 0.00100

(−0.182, −0.119)

Low 20%

1.00

1.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Career length

26/31



Table S7. Statistical significance of the gender gap in the research career for the authors in Japan.

Indicator

Group

µF

µM

t-statistic

p-value

95% CI of µF −µM

Overall

5.76

10.0

−81.9

< 0.00100

(−4.37, −4.16)

Top 20%

15.0

32.5

−84.0

< 0.00100

(−18.0, −17.1)

Middle 20%

3.61

4.61

−172

< 0.00100

(−1.01, −0.984)

Low 20%

2.00

2.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Productivity

Overall

8.16

10.2

−19.0

< 0.00100

(−2.24, −1.82)

Top 20%

29.2

40.2

−24.6

< 0.00100

(−11.9, −10.1)

Middle 20%

3.16

2.75

52.5

< 0.00100

(0.398, 0.428)

Low 20%

0.239

0.128

45.7

< 0.00100

(0.107, 0.116)

Total impact

Overall

1.36

1.32

7.60

< 0.00100

(0.0281, 0.0477)

Top 20%

2.85

2.91

−4.62

< 0.00100

(−0.0804, −0.0325)

Middle 20%

1.14

1.07

52.2

< 0.00100

(0.0654, 0.0705)

Low 20%

0.403

0.340

42.9

< 0.00100

(0.0606, 0.0664)

Annual productivity

Overall

5.15

8.53

−107

< 0.00100

(−3.44, −3.32)

Top 20%

14.0

24.3

−126

< 0.00100

(−10.4, −10.0)

Middle 20%

3.28

4.88

−235

< 0.00100

(−1.61, −1.59)

Low 20%

1.00

1.14

−96.6

< 0.00100

(−0.145, −0.139)

Career length

Table S8. Statistical significance of the gender gap in the research career for the authors in South Korea.

Indicator

Group

µF

µM

t-statistic

p-value

95% CI of µF −µM

Overall

4.92

6.17

−17.0

< 0.00100

(−1.39, −1.10)

Top 20%

11.5

16.7

−20.2

< 0.00100

(−5.74, −4.73)

Middle 20%

3.50

3.67

−11.1

< 0.00100

(−0.204, −0.142)

Low 20%

2.00

2.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Productivity

Overall

7.45

6.13

5.95

< 0.00100

(0.888, 1.76)

Top 20%

25.4

22.4

3.29

0.00102

(1.20, 4.75)

Middle 20%

3.25

2.20

50.2

< 0.00100

(1.01, 1.09)

Low 20%

0.276

0.137

19.3

< 0.00100

(0.125, 0.153)

Total impact

Overall

1.54

1.42

8.01

< 0.00100

(0.0955, 0.157)

Top 20%

3.24

3.06

4.62

< 0.00100

(0.106, 0.263)

Middle 20%

1.31

1.17

33.8

< 0.00100

(0.134, 0.151)

Low 20%

0.448

0.385

13.2

< 0.00100

(0.0539, 0.0726)

Annual productivity

Overall

3.91

5.27

−22.9

< 0.00100

(−1.48, −1.25)

Top 20%

10.3

14.2

−24.5

< 0.00100

(−4.24, −3.61)

Middle 20%

2.51

3.34

−51.9

< 0.00100

(−0.859, −0.796)

Low 20%

1.00

1.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Career length

27/31



Table S9. Statistical significance of the gender gap in the research career for the authors in the other countries.

Indicator

Group

µF

µM

t-statistic

p-value

95% CI of µF −µM

Overall

5.73

8.33

−172

< 0.00100

(−2.63, −2.57)

Top 20%

15.1

26.1

−178

< 0.00100

(−11.1, −10.9)

Middle 20%

3.54

4.08

−336

< 0.00100

(−0.541, −0.535)

Low 20%

2.00

2.00

N/A

N/A

N/A

Productivity

Overall

14.3

18.1

−57.5

< 0.00100

(−3.88, −3.62)

Top 20%

52.5

72.0

−67.2

< 0.00100

(−20.1, −18.9)

Middle 20%

5.19

4.76

127

< 0.00100

(0.426, 0.440)

Low 20%

0.431

0.310

118

< 0.00100

(0.120, 0.124)

Total impact

Overall

1.20

1.18

16.2

< 0.00100

(0.0174, 0.0222)

Top 20%

2.56

2.65

−29.0

< 0.00100

(−0.0936, −0.0818)

Middle 20%

0.996

0.947

155

< 0.00100

(0.0484, 0.0496)

Low 20%

0.335

0.281

162

< 0.00100

(0.0531, 0.0544)

Annual productivity

Overall

6.16

8.75

−240

< 0.00100

(−2.61, −2.57)

Top 20%

17.3

25.6

−314

< 0.00100

(−8.28, −8.17)

Middle 20%

3.70

4.86

−539

< 0.00100

(−1.16, −1.16)

Low 20%

1.00

1.18

−260

< 0.00100

(−0.174, −0.171)

Career length

Table S10. Pearson correlation coefficients between the career length and the number of coauthors of all the authors, female

authors, and male authors in each country group.

Country

Gender

All

Female

Male

China

0.35

0.32

0.36

Japan

0.49

0.39

0.49

South Korea

0.45

0.30

0.45

Other countries

0.40

0.33

0.41

28/31



(a) Total productivity

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

(b) Total impact

China

Japan

South

Korea

Other

Figure S1. Results of the matching experiment when we restrict the analysis to the papers in which the authors occupy the

prominent author position. (a) Total productivity. (b) Total impact. In the matching experiment, we controlled for the author’s

career length (CL) and/or their number of coauthors (NC) in addition to their country group, year of the first publication, and

research discipline.

29/31



China

Japan

South

Korea

(a) From all

China

Japan

South

Korea

(b) From MM

China

Japan

South

Korea

(c) From MW

China

Japan

South

Korea

(d) From WM

China

Japan

South

Korea

(e) From WW

Figure S2. Gender imbalance in domestic citations made by papers whose authors are in China, Japan, and South Korea. (a)

All papers. (b) MM papers. (c) MW papers. (d) WM papers. (e) WW papers. CN, JP, and KR stand for China, Japan, and

South Korea, respectively.

30/31



China

Japan

South

Korea

(a) From all

China

Japan

South

Korea

(b) From MM

China

Japan

South

Korea

(c) From MW

China

Japan

South

Korea

(d) From WM

China

Japan

South

Korea

(e) From WW

Figure S3. Gender imbalance in foreign citations made by papers whose authors are in China, Japan, and South Korea. (a) All

papers. (b) MM papers. (c) MW papers. (d) WM papers. (e) WW papers. OT stands for the other countries.

31/31