The effect of the rapid growth of covid-19 publications on

citation indicators



Peter Sjögårde*



* peter.sjogarde@ki.se

Health Informatics Centre, Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics

Karolinska Institutet

University Library, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4442-1360




## Abstract


A concern has been raised that “covidization” of research would cause an overemphasizes on

covid-19 and pandemics at the expense of other research. The rapid growth of publications

related to the Covid-19 pandemic renders a vast amount of citations from this literature. This

growth may affect bibliometric indicators. In this paper I explored how the growth of covid-

19 publications influences bibliometric indicators commonly used in university rankings,

research evaluation and research allocation, namely the field normalized citation score and the

journal impact factor.



I found that the burst of publications in the early stage of the covid-19 pandemic affects field-

normalized citation scores and will affect the journal impact factor. Publications unrelated to

covid-19 are also heavily affected. I conclude that there is a considerable risk to draw

misleading conclusions from citation indicators spanning over the beginning of the covid-19

pandemic, in particular when time series are used and when the biomedical literature is

assessed.




## Introduction


The pandemic caused by the sars-cov-2 virus, which causes the covid-19 infection, started in

late 2019 and was followed by a rapid emergence and increase of publications addressing

different aspects of the pandemic (Aristovnik et al., 2020; Colavizza et al., 2021). The rapid

growth of publications in this topic also renders a vast amount of citations from this literature.

A recent preprint shows that the most cited publications in 2020-2021 are heavily dominated

by covid-19 publications and that the same relation is found when looking at the most cited

researchers (Ioannidis et al., 2022). A concern has been raised that “covidization” of research

would cause an overemphasizes on covid-19 and pandemics at the expense of other research,

e.g. other global public health threats (Adam, 2020).



Bibliometric indicators are used in university rankings, resource allocation and research

evaluations at various levels and thereby influence research policy. The rapid growth of

covid-19 publications may affect bibliometric indicators. Sjögårde and Didegah (2022) has

shown that growing research topics in general have a citation advantage over more slowly

growing or declining research topics. This relation can partly be attributed to a simple

quantitative aspect, namely that in a growing topic there are more citing publications than

publications to be cited (Vinkler, 1996). Publications published shortly after the emergence of

a topic therefore have a citation advantage.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

In this paper I explore how the rapid growth of covid-19 publications influences bibliometric

indicators commonly used in university rankings, research evaluation and research allocation,

namely field normalized citation score and the journal impact factor (JIF).



Characteristics of covid-19 publications

The analyses were restricted to biomedical literature. A search query (Table 1) was used to

identify publications in PubMed/MEDLINE about covid-19 or the virus causing the disease

(sars-cov-2). The query has been elaborated by the university library at Karolinska Institutet

and was conducted 26 January 2022. I refer to the set of publications retrieved by this search

query as covid-19 publications.

Table 1: Search query for Covid-19/SARS-CoV2 research

COVID*[tw] OR nCov[tw] OR 2019 ncov[tw] OR novel coronavirus[tw] OR novel corona virus[tw]

OR "COVID-19"[All Fields] OR "COVID-2019"[All Fields] OR "severe acute respiratory syndrome

coronavirus 2"[Supplementary Concept] OR "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2"[All

Fields] OR "2019-nCoV"[All Fields] OR "SARS-CoV-2"[All Fields] OR "2019nCoV"[All Fields] OR

(("Wuhan"[All Fields] AND ("coronavirus"[MeSH Terms] OR "corona virus"[All Fields] OR

"coronavirus"[All Fields])) AND (2019/12[PDAT] OR 2020:2022[PDAT]))

Citations were calculated using in-house version of the Web of Science (WoS) at Karolinska

Institutet, containing data from the Science Citation Index Expanded, Social Sciences Citation

Index and Arts & Humanities Citation Index.1 The analyses are restricted to the intersection

between Web of Science and PubMed if not otherwise stated. Furthermore, a restriction was

made to the Web of Science publication types “article” and “review” and to publications from

2020 and 2021. The search resulted in 31,789 publications in 2020 and 74,064 in 2021, an

increase of about 133%.

shows the number of publications in 2021 at the primary y-axis for the covid-19 set as well as

the 20 largest Web of Science journal categories in medicine (without restriction to PubMed

publications). The secondary axis shows the number of citations from 2021 to 2020. It is

shown that covid-19 publications cite more publications from 2020 than any of the journal

categories, despite being less than half the size of the largest category (“Materials Science,

Multidisciplinary”). This shows that covid-19 publications cite recent publications in a much

higher extent than other medical publications.

1 Certain data included herein are derived from the Web of Science ® prepared by Clarivate Analytics ®, Inc.

(Clarivate®), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: © Copyright Clarivate Analytics Group ® 2022. All rights

reserved.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Figure 1: Number of publications in 2021 (primary axis) and number of outgoing citations from 2021 to 2020 (secondary

axis) for the covid-19 set and for the 20 largest Web of Science journal categories in medicine. Web of Science journal

categories ordered by number of publications from left to right.

The average number of outgoing citations from covid-19 publications in 2021 is relativly

low, about 30 (Figure 2). However, as much as 37% of these citations goes to the previous

year. This figure varies between 5-15% in medical journal categories. It is clear from figure 1

and 2 that covid-19 publications cited recent papers to a much higher extent than expected in

the beginning of the pandemic.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Figure 2: Total number of outgoing citations in 2021 as well as share of citations to 2020 for the covid-19 set and for the

20 largest Web of Science journal categories in medicine. Web of Science journal categories ordered by number of outgoing

citations to 2020  from left to right.

Highly cited publications

To be able to compare highly cited publications in 2020 with previous publication years a

two-year citation window was used. Figure 3 shows publications from 2019 with more than

200 citations, ordered from left to right by the number of received citations. About 170

publications from 2019 had been cited more than 200 times before the end of 2020. Figure 4

shows the same information for publications from 2020 but with covid-19 publications

excluded. This figure looks approximately the same as the figure for 2019. A small increase

from 2019 and 2020 of the number of publications with more than 200 citations after a two-

year period can be seen, when covid-19 publications are excluded. In Figure 5 the covid-19

publications have been added (yellow marks). The number of publications with more than 200

citations has now increased to almost 1,000. This shows the domination of covid-19

publications among the world’s most highly cited publications.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Figure 3: Publications from 2019 with more than 200 citations using a two-year time window. Order by rank from left to

right.

Figure 4:Publications from 2020 with more than 200 citations using a two-year time window. Order by rank from left to

right. Covid-19 publications excluded.

Figure 5: Publications from 2020 with more than 200 citations using a two-year time window. Order by rank from left to

right. Covid-19 publications in yellow.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Effects on field normalization

The citation rate of covid-19 publications in 2020 was in general much higher than other

publications within the same journal category after a two-year period (Figure 6). For example,

in “Medicine, General & Internal” the average citation rate was about 3.5 for non-covid

publications, 55 for covid-19 publications and 7,7 for the category in total.



The field normalized citation score is used in many rankings and evaluations. For a

publication, this indicator is usually calculated by dividing the number of citations to the

publication by the average number of citations in the same field, from the same publication

year and commonly also of the same publication type. The Web of science journal categories

are commonly used as fields in this calculation. If we again take “Medicine, General &

Internal” as an example, we see that the value of the denominator in this field (the field


## reference value) is more than doubled by the covid-19 publications. To illustrate the effect on


the field normalized citation score, we can for example consider a cancer publication having

no relation to covid-19 and which has received 14 citations after a two-year period. This

publication would have a field normalized citation score of 4 if covid-publications are

excluded. However, the covid-19 publications reduce the normalized citation rate of such

publication to about 1.8.

Figure 6: Average number of citations in 2020 for the covid-19 set and for the 20 largest Web of Science categories in

medicine after a two-year period. For each category the dark grey bar shows the average number of citations for all

publications, the yellow bar shows the average number of citations for covid-19 publications and the light grey bar shows the

average number of citations for non-covid publications. Web of Science categories are ordered from left to right by the

proportion of covid-19 publications.

Even in some fields with a low proportion of covid-19 publications the average citation rate is

heavily affected by the high citation rates of covid-19 publications. In for example “Cardiac &



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Cardiovascular Systems” with only about 3.9% covid-19 publications (Table 1) the average

citation rate is about 24% higher when covid-19 publications are considered (5.6 compared to

4.5).

Table 2: The total number of publications, covid-19 publications and non-covid-19 publications in 2020 for the covid-19

set and for the 20 largest Web of Science categories in medicine.

Category

Publications

Non-covid-19

publications

Covid-19

publications

Covid-19

31789

0

31789 (100%)

Infectious Diseases

19174

16807

2367 (12.3%)

Virology

6897

6063

834 (12.1%)

Medicine, General & Internal

40691

37414

3277 (8.1%)

Public, Environmental & Occupational Health

46981

43492

3489 (7.4%)

Health Care Sciences & Services

16678

15573

1105 (6.6%)

Immunology

29510

27713

1797 (6.1%)

Psychiatry

24584

23382

1202 (4.9%)

Microbiology

28791

27581

1210 (4.2%)

Pediatrics

19955

19120

835 (4.2%)

Cardiac & Cardiovascular Systems

23421

22501

920 (3.9%)

Medicine, Research & Experimental

37055

35679

1376 (3.7%)

Clinical Neurology

35118

34119

999 (2.8%)

Surgery

41290

40119

1171 (2.8%)

Pharmacology & Pharmacy

53386

51940

1446 (2.7%)

Multidisciplinary Sciences

73644

71916

1728 (2.3%)

Cell Biology

36271

35553

718 (2%)

Neurosciences

44084

43424

660 (1.5%)

Biochemistry & Molecular Biology

74850

73774

1076 (1.4%)

Oncology

55057

54291

766 (1.4%)

Environmental Sciences

100689

99531

1158 (1.2%)



Effects on the journal impact factor (JIF)

JIF is used in many rankings and evaluations, despite such use has been discussed and

criticized (e.g., see Aksnes et al., 2019; Hicks et al., 2015; Seglen, 1998). JIF is ”calculated by

dividing the number of current year citations to the source items published in that journal

during the previous two years” (“The Clarivate Analytics Impact Factor,” n.d.). The most

recent impact factor is the 2021 edition, which is based on citations from 2020 to 2018-2019.

This edition has not been much affected by the covid-19 pandemic, because there were

practically no covid-19 publications in 2018-2019 and only about 32,000 covid-19

publications in 2020. However, the burst of covid-19 publications in 2021 citing publications

from 2020 is likely to affect the 2022 edition of the indicator, which will be based on citations

from 2021 to publications from 2019-2020.



I did not have access to all the indexes in Web of Science that are used to calculate JIF. To

calculate an estimated JIF, I used the three main indexes (Science Citation Index Expanded,

Social Sciences Citation Index and Arts & Humanities Citation Index) across 8,037 journals

(journals with at least 50 articles or reviews). The estimated JIF for year y was calculated as

the total number of citations (no restrictions to publication type) from year y to the journal,



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

divided by the number of publications of the types “article” and “review” in year y-1 and y-2.

Since the estimated JIF is based on fewer citing publications it is generally lower than the real

JIF. However, this does not have much effect on the relative ranking of journals. Figure 7

shows the correlation between the real JIF in 2020 (edition 2021) and the estimated JIF for the

same year.

Figure 7: Correlation between estimated JIF and real JIF based on citations from 2020 to 2018-2019 (edition 2021).

Most journals with a high proportion of covid-19 publications increased their estimated JIF

between 2020 and 2021. Figure 8 shows the about 8,000 journals in a scatter plot with the

percentual change of the JIF between 2020 and 2021 on the y-axis and the percentage of

covid-19 publications on the x-axis. Almost all the journals with more than 10% covid-19

publications increased their JIF. 18 journals with more than 5% covid-19 publications (out of


## 521) increased their JIF by more than 200%. Only three journals with less than 5% covid-19


publications (out of 7,516) increased their JIF by as much.

Figure 8: Correlation between the percentage of covid-19 publications in 2019-2020 (x-axis) and increase of estimated

JIF between 2020 and 2021 (y-axis) for 8,037 journals in Web of Science.



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Most of the 20 journals having the highest absolute increase of the estimated JIF had between

5 and 15% covid-19 publications in 2019-2020. “Lancet” goes from an estimated JIF of about

65 to 169 and is predicted to be the journal with the highest JIF in the 2022 edition.

Figure 9: The 20 journals having the highest absolute increase of the estimated JIF between 2020 (based on citations

from 2020 to 2018-2019) and 2021 (based on citations from 2021 to 2019-2020). The journal name is followed by the share

of covid-19 publications in 2019-2020.


## Discussion and conclusions


The burst of publications in the early stage of the covid-19 pandemic addressing topics related

to the pandemic has profound consequences on citation indicators, severely affecting the

validity of bibliometric indicators. The study has shown that field normalized citation scores

may be distorted, and the JIF was estimated to be profoundly affected.



A hypothetical unit can be used to illustrate how units under assessment may be affected in

evaluations. Consider a unit with a constant publishing output completely in the field of

“Pediatrics” and with an average citation rate corresponding to the field average. Such unit

would have a field normalized citation score of 1, given that full counting has been applied.

Now assume that this unit keeps publishing non-covid publications in 2020 with the same

average citation rate as the earlier publications. Its field normalized citation score will now

drop from 1 to 0.71 because of the change of the field reference value caused by the covid-19

publications. Now consider that this unit publishes equal parts in the three largest journals for

pediatrics (“JAMA pediatrics”, “Pediatrics” and “The Journal of pediatrics”). The unit would

then have an increase of their estimated JIF with about 54% (the average increase in JIF in the

three journals), also because of the high citation rate of covid-19 publications. This shows that

the evaluation of the unit is affected by factors outside the unit and that the change of the



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

normalized citation rate and JIF have no or little relation to the quality of the research at the

unit or the impact the unit has at the rest of the research community.



There are some limitations of the current study. I have mainly focused on cited-side

normalization of citations using the Web of Science journal categories. Other approaches for

citation normalization may not be affected the same way by the covid publications, for

example if citation clusters are used as fields (Colliander, 2015; Ruiz-Castillo & Waltman,

2015; Waltman & van Eck, 2013). Moreover, the field normalized citation score is an

average-based indicator. Percentile-based indicators may be less affected (Bornmann et al.,

2013). Furthermore, I have focused on one journal indicator only, namely the journal impact

factor. I expected the JIF to be affected by the rapid growth of covid-19 publications because

the indicator is based on citations from one publication year only. Other journal indicators

may not be as heavily affected. Future work may focus on other indicators.



The extreme growth of covid-19 publications and their unusual citation pattern has caused

citation indicators to be more unstable. There is a considerable risk to draw misleading


## conclusions from citation indicators spanning over the beginning of the covid-19 pandemic, in


particular when time series are used and when the biomedical literature is assessed. The study

supports the concern that there is a risk of overemphasizing on covid-19 related research at

the expense of other research areas, not the least since citation indicators influence research

policy.



Funding information

Peter Sjögårde was funded by The Foundation for Promotion and Development of Research at

Karolinska Institutet.




## References


Adam, D. (2020). Scientists fear that ‘covidization’ is distorting research. Nature, 588(7838),

381–382. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03388-w

Aksnes, D. W., Langfeldt, L., & Wouters, P. (2019). Citations, Citation Indicators, and

Research Quality: An Overview of Basic Concepts and Theories. SAGE Open, 9(1),


## 2158244019829575. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019829575


Aristovnik, A., Ravšelj, D., & Umek, L. (2020). A Bibliometric Analysis of COVID-19

across Science and Social Science Research Landscape. Sustainability, 12(21), 9132.

https://doi.org/10.3390/su12219132

Bornmann, L., Leydesdorff, L., & Mutz, R. (2013). The use of percentiles and percentile rank

classes in the analysis of bibliometric data: Opportunities and limits. Journal of Informetrics,

7(1), 158–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2012.10.001

Colavizza, G., Costas, R., Traag, V. A., Eck, N. J. van, Leeuwen, T. van, & Waltman, L.

(2021). A scientometric overview of CORD-19. PLOS ONE, 16(1), e0244839.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244839

Colliander, C. (2015). A novel approach to citation normalization: A similarity-based method

for creating reference sets. Journal of the Association for Information Science and

Technology, 66(3), 489–500. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23193



STI Conference 2022 · Granada

Hicks, D., Wouters, P., Waltman, L., de Rijcke, S., & Rafols, I. (2015). Bibliometrics: The

Leiden Manifesto for research metrics. Nature, 520(7548), 429–431.

https://doi.org/10.1038/520429a

Ioannidis, J. P. A., Bendavid, E., Salholz-Hillel, M., Boyack, K. W., & Baas, J. (2022).

Massive covidization of research citations and the citation elite (p. 2022.01.24.22269775).

medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.24.22269775

Ruiz-Castillo, J., & Waltman, L. (2015). Field-normalized citation impact indicators using

algorithmically constructed classification systems of science. Journal of Informetrics, 9(1),

102–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2014.11.010

Seglen, P. O. (1998). Citation rates and journal impact factors are not suitable for evaluation

of research. Acta Orthopaedica Scandinavica, 69(3), 224–229.

https://doi.org/10.3109/17453679809000920

Sjögårde, P., & Didegah, F. (2022). The association between topic growth and citation impact

of research publications. Scientometrics, 127(4), 1903–1921. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-

022-04293-x

The Clarivate Analytics Impact Factor. (n.d.). Web of Science Group. Retrieved April 25,

2022, from https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/essays/impact-factor/

Vinkler, P. (1996). Relationships between the rate of scientific development and citations.

The chance for citedness model. Scientometrics, 35(3), 375–386.

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02016908

Waltman, L., & van Eck, N. J. (2013). Source normalized indicators of citation impact: An

overview of different approaches and an empirical comparison. Scientometrics, 96(3), 699–


## 716. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0913-4
