The Concept of Decentralization Through Time and Disciplines:

A Quantitative Exploration

Gabriele Di Bona1,2,3,+, Alberto Bracci4,+, Nicola Perra1, Vito Latora1,5,6, and

Andrea Baronchelli4,7,8,*

1School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom

2CNRS, GEMASS, 59 rue Pouchet, Paris F-75017, France

arXiv:2207.14260v2  [physics.soc-ph]  6 Oct 2023

3Sony Computer Science Laboratories Rome, Joint Initiative CREF-Sony, Rome I-00184, Italy

4City, University of London, Department of Mathematics, London EC1V 0HB, UK

5Complexity Science Hub Vienna, A-1080 Vienna, Austria

6Dipartimento di Fisica ed Astronomia, Universit`a di Catania and INFN, I-95123 Catania, Italy

7The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW12DB, UK

8UCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

+Contributed equally

*Corresponding author: abaronchelli@turing.ac.uk


## Abstract


Decentralization is a pervasive concept found across disciplines, including Economics, Political

Science, and Computer Science, where it is used in distinct yet interrelated ways. Here, we develop

and publicly release a general pipeline to investigate the scholarly history of the term, analysing

425 144 academic publications that refer to (de)centralization. We find that the fraction of papers

on the topic has been exponentially increasing since the 1950s. In 2021, 1 author in 154 mentioned

(de)centralization in the title or abstract of an article. Using both semantic information and citation

patterns, we cluster papers in fields and characterize the knowledge flows between them. Our analysis

reveals that the topic has independently emerged in the different fields, with small cross-disciplinary

contamination.

Moreover, we show how Blockchain has become the most influential field about

10 years ago, while Governance dominated before the 1990s. In summary, our findings provide a

quantitative assessment of the evolution of a key yet elusive concept, which has undergone cycles of

rise and fall within different fields. Our pipeline offers a powerful tool to analyze the evolution of

any scholarly term in the academic literature, providing insights into the interplay between collective

and independent discoveries in science.

1


## Introduction


“For students of recent domestic affairs it is becoming increasingly evident that ‘decentralization’ is a

magic word”. With these words in 1975 Herbert London opens his article “The meaning of decentraliza-

tion” [1]. Almost 50 years later, Schneider states that decentralization “is called for far more than it is

theorized or consistently defined” [2]. (De)centralization (i.e., either Decentralization or its counterpart

Centralization) has indeed become almost a buzzword, permeating not only the academic literature,

but also the public discussion. The debate between centralized and decentralized contact tracing at the

1



beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic is a clear example [3]. However, one of the major drivers of its

growth has certainly been the rise of blockchain based technologies such as cryptocurrencies, NFTs and

the metaverse. [4, 5, 6, 7].

However, (de)centralization is not a new concept, and has different connotations across fields. In

political science, it usually refers to the delegation of power to local communities with respect to a

central government [8]. The concept has similar connotations when referring to educational [9], fiscal [10]

and more generally governance systems. Other domains where the term is widely used include public

health [11], internet protocols [12], robot swarms [13] and social network analysis [14] among others, with

the last one providing one of the few quantitative definitions available thanks to Freeman in 1978. Given

this background, some questions naturally arise: have these different disciplines independently developed

the concept of (de)centralization, maybe even with different meanings (i.e., a case of polysemy)? Have

they influenced each other? Which fields have been most influential to the evolution of this concept?

Here, we address these questions by studying a corpus of scientific literature indexed by the Semantic

Scholar open database [15]. First, we observe an exponentially growing interest in the topic, with an

author in 154 contributing to a paper mentioning (de)centralization in its title or abstract in 2021. Then,

we map the literature on (de)centralization by focusing on the subset of relevant articles and clustering

them according to their semantic and citation information. This way, we discover that different academic

fields have separately contributed to this topic. We hence study how the different clusters have influenced

each other, showing how much more transfer of knowledge between different academic areas is happening

in recent years. Interestingly, our analysis reveals that STEM and social sciences did not influence each

other. Finally, we focus on two paradigmatic examples: Governance, interpreted generally as “the way

that organizations or countries are managed at the highest level, and the systems for doing this” [16],

and Blockchain, including all blockchain based technologies, from cryptocurrencies to NFTs and the

metaverse. We show how Governance is the first cluster to extensively make use of the term (de)cen-

tralization, containing the most or second most number of papers each year since its appearance in the

1950s, and playing a leading role in the transfer of knowledge to other fields until the 1990s. Blockchain

instead has become both the most influential cluster and the most productive cluster in the past 10

years, showing three different phases in its recent history characterized by different interactions with

other fields. Overall, our results shed light on the history and evolution of the more and more important

concept of (de)centralization. Furthermore, we publicly release the code of the pipeline developed in this

study, so that it may be used to study and understand the evolution of other concepts through the lenses

of the academic literature.

2

The pipeline

In this section, we briefly describe the pipeline we have set up and publicly released1 to select the data

and perform the research described in this study. The pipeline is conceptually divided into three steps:

(1) data collection, (2) clustering of the dataset using a multilayer hierarchical stochastic block model,

and (3) analysis of the influence between clusters over time using knowledge flows.

1See https://github.com/alberto-bracci/decentralization.

2



Step 1: Data Collection

The first step consists in collecting the academic publications related to the concept of (de)centralization,

or potentially to other concepts. To perform a large scale analysis of the academic literature, we exploit

the possibility to access the publicly available Semantic Scholar Academic Graph (S2AG, pronounced

“stag”), which provides monthly snapshots of research papers published in all fields [15]. Launched in

2015 by the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2), Semantic Scholar provides this corpus as an

open access database with the specific scope of facilitating scientific analysis of academic publications.

It contains about 203.6 million papers (1st Jan. 2022 snapshot), 76.4 million authors, and 2 billion

citations. Moreover, this database recently incorporated the Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) [17],

which was shut down at the end of 2021 [18].

From this corpus we extracted the data about papers that contain the root string “centrali” in words

of the title or abstract, to capture possibly all variations of words related to the concepts of Centralization

and Decentralization (nouns, adjectives, etc.). In this way, we also incidentally captured articles written

in different languages, mainly Portuguese, French and Spanish, and also a minority of unrelated articles

(e.g., biology articles involving plant species including “centrali” in their name). More information on the

frequency of the words containing such root string can be found in Table S1 in the Supplementary Material

(SM). The resulting dataset has 425 144 papers characterized by a series of attributes. Among these, of

particular interest to us there is the title, the abstract, the authors, all in- and out-citations (respectively

citations and references), the year of publication, and the fields of study, which were determined based

on machine learning field classifiers leveraging on the existing MAG taxonomy and classification [19].

Notice, however, that some articles miss one or more of these attributes. See Table S2 in the SM for

details on how many papers have each of these attributes.

Step 2: Hierarchical clustering

In the Semantic Scholar corpus almost each paper is associated to a list of fields of study. However,

these are high-level, as there are in fact only 19 fields of very heterogeneous sizes (see Table S3 in the

SM for details on how many papers are classified in each field of study). Moreover, sometimes the fields

are not correctly assigned. In the second step of the pipeline, we hence use a multilayer hierarchical

stochastic block model (hSBM) [20, 21], developed to find statistically significant clusters at multiple

hierarchical levels for the analysis of text data with multiple data types. Here, in fact, we consider

two layers. The document layer —where links represent citations between papers— and the text layer

—a bipartite network between documents and the words present in their titles. The method naturally

produces clusters of documents and topics (word clusters), incorporating the information from both

layers in the process. Furthermore, as the name suggests, the model produces a hierarchical clustering,

providing a richer structure of both article clusters and topics, which captures both small clusters and

topics and how they are related to each other in a higher level structure.

We consider only the papers in our dataset that have a non-empty title and contain at least one

citation or reference to another paper in the dataset (42.7% of the initial dataset), as we are interested

in how the concept of (de)centralization evolved in the academic literature, and citations are the most

natural proxy for how knowledge is transferred. We use title texts, instead of abstracts, for various

reasons: firstly, because the title is more frequently available than the abstract (see Table S2 in the SM);

secondly, because the title has the advantage of being more distilled compared to abstracts [22]; lastly,

3



because titles contain a significantly smaller number of words than abstracts, allowing us to obtain a

text layer similar to the document layer in terms of number of edges by simply cutting out words present

in less than 5 documents. It is indeed well known that the hSBM performs optimally when both layers

have roughly the same size, otherwise the smaller layer is effectively ignored by the algorithm [21]. The

filtered dataset hence consists of 181 605 documents and 15 381 different words, summing up to 590 215

document-to-document citation links and 1 396 830 document-to-word links.

To ensure the robustness of our results, we performed 100 iterations of the algorithm. Notice that the

number of clusters and levels of granularity obtained is not fixed, but is automatically suggested by the

algorithm. By running the algorithm multiple times, we aimed to capture the inherent variability and

uncertainty in the Monte Carlo partitioning process. Subsequently, the consensus partition is calculated

by maximizing the overlap with all the partitions from the 100 runs. Such consensus partition serves as

a robust representation of the underlying structure within the analyzed data. More statistics comparing

the single iterations of the hSBM and the consensus partition are shown in Fig. S2 in the SM.

Afterwards, keywords are assigned to each cluster to roughly represent the content and themes of the

articles within them (for more details see Fig. S3, Fig. S4 and Table S4 in the SM, with related section).

Keywords are chosen by looking at the most frequent words in the cluster, the most significant topics

in the cluster according to the normalized mixture proportion [21], as well as the first 5 papers in the

cluster according to different measures (see SM Section 2.1 for more details).

Step 3: Knowledge flows

In the third step of the pipeline, we want to better understand how the different groups of documents

identified by the hSBM have influenced each other throughout history.

To do so, we evaluate the

knowledge flows between these groups, using article citations as proxy [23]. In particular, we compute

the knowledge flow from one cluster a in one year Ya to another cluster b in a future year Yb. The

computation takes into account the fraction of citations towards papers in a of the year Ya from papers

in b published in the year Yb with respect to the fraction of citations towards a in Ya from all papers

published in Yb, as well as the overall fraction of papers of a in Ya. The citation network suffers indeed

from a series of inherent biases: field size, typical number of citations in a field or a journal, typical

number of references, age of the fields etc. This method de facto considers the number of citations with

respect to a null model, resulting in a link weight which is effectively a z-score.

Mathematically, if a collection of papers is divided in a partition P of clusters such that different

clusters do not overlap and altogether form the collection of papers, then we can define the knowledge

flow units Ca→b(Ya, Yb) from papers in cluster a ∈P published in the year Ya to papers in cluster b ∈P

in a future year Yb by counting how many citations have occurred from b to a in the two years, that is,

Ca→b(Ya, Yb) = |{(x, y) : x ∈a, Yx = Ya, y ∈b, Yy = Yb s.t. y cites x}|.

(1)

As said before, we need to normalize this number with respect to a null model, so as to keep into

account different sizes of clusters and different norms in citation practices. Hence, the knowledge flow

4



Ka→b(Ya, Yb) from a in year Ya to b in year Yb can be computed in the following way:

|x ∈a : Yx = Ya|

P







1

if

Ca→b(Ya, Yb)

P

c∈P |x ∈c : Yx = Ya| ≥1

c∈P Cc→b(Ya, Yb)

Ka→b(Ya, Yb) =

0

otherwise

,

(2)





After the normalization against the null model, knowledge flows can be indeed treated as z-scores. Hence,

in Eq. (2) we consider a knowledge flow as significant (i.e., a binary value of 1) if higher than the threshold

1, and as not significant (i.e., 0) otherwise.

Therefore, we obtain a binary value for each pair of clusters and each pair of years. In other words, the

collection of (knowledge flow) links between all pairs of clusters and years generates a temporal network

of clusters, which we aggregate in different ways to facilitate the following analysis. In particular, we

consider the average knowledge flow Ka→b(Ya) from a cluster a to another b from a specific year Ya as

the average of the knowledge flows Ka→b(Ya, Yb) from cluster a to b from year Ya to all years Yb > Ya,

taking into account only years Yb where there is at least one publication in b. Formally, this reads:

Ka→b(Ya) = Ka→b(Ya, •) = ⟨Ka→b(Ya, Yb)⟩{Yb > Ya : ∃x ∈b s.t. Yx = Yb} .

(3)

This value represents, on a scale from 0 to 1, how much publications in cluster a in year Ya have influenced

the future of cluster b. Analogously, we define the average knowledge flow Ka→b(T) from cluster a to

cluster b from a period of time T to the future by averaging Ka→b(Ya) over all years Ya in T in which

there is at least one publication in a, that is,

Ka→b(T) = ⟨Ka→b(Ya)⟩{Ya ∈T : ∃x ∈a s.t. Yx = Ya} .

(4)

We can also measure the average influence in terms of knowledge flows from a cluster to all other

clusters and vice-versa, as well as the average knowledge flow among all clusters, respectively as follows:

Ka→•(Y ) = ⟨Ka→b(Y )⟩b ,

(5)

K•→a(Y ) = ⟨Kb→a(Y )⟩b ,

K•→•(Y ) = ⟨Ka→b(Y )⟩a,b .

Here, Ka→•(Y ) refers to the average influence from papers in cluster a published in year Y towards all

clusters in the future. On the opposite, K•→a(Y ) refers to the average influence of the papers in all

clusters in the year Y towards the future of cluster a. Finally, K•→•(Y ) refers to the average influence

(towards the future) of all papers published in year Y .

3


## Results


3.1

The decentralized evolution of (de)centralization

We start by analysing the number of papers mentioning (de)centralization over the years (see The

pipeline section for more details), comparing it to the total number of academic outputs (papers, books

etc.) produced in time, which is known to be exponentially increasing [24]. As shown in Fig. 1(a),

the fraction of papers mentioning (de)centralization has been exponentially increasing in time since the

5



(a)

fraction of papers

(b)

fraction of authors

10

2

10

2

10

3

10

3

y(t) ∼e

0.036t

y(t) ∼e

0.041t

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

10

4

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

10

4

(c)

Robot swarms (routing, robot swarms, planning, allocation, supply chain, game theory, congestion)

Cybersecurity (cybersecurity, cloud, peer2peer, security, fault tolearance, attacks)

Smart grids (smart grids, energy trading, blockchain)

Blockchain (blockchain, cryptocurrency, ethereum, bitcoin)

Federated learning (federated learning, deep learning, adversarial networks)

Optimization (control theory, statistical learning, heterogeneity, equilibrium, optimization, links, detection, web, health)

Control theory (control theory, navigation, discrete-event systems, nonlinear dynamics, flocking, decision making, formation)

Electricity (electricity, grids)

Investments (networks, investments, connectivity, money, syncronization, risk, routing, algorithm, topology)

Edge

computing (edge-computing, cloud-computing)

Telecommunication (cellular networks, wireless, routing, communication, localization, protocols, radio, security)

Wireless technologies (spanish, wireless, cybersecurity, allocation, decision making)

Governance (governance, natural resources, fiscal federalism, education, government, development)

Environment (routing, renewable energy, portoguese, wastewater, latin america, environment)

Social network analysis (supply chain, social network analysis, manufacturing, organizations, pricing, firms)

Health (algebra, hospitals, healthcare, HIV, symptoms, cancer, surgery)

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

10

3

Number of papers

10

2

10

1

10

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Figure 1: The rising interest of academic literature towards (de)centralization. (a) Fraction of

papers mentioning (de)centralization in the Semantic Scholar corpus. (b) Fraction of authors mentioning

(de)centralization in the Semantic Scholar corpus. Both fractions have been steadily increasing since the

1950s, showing growing interest in the topic. (c) Number of papers in the clusters at the 3rd level of

the hierarchy in each year. Clusters are ordered respecting the hierarchical network on the left, in which

node and link sizes are proportional to the total number of papers in the related cluster. In the heatmap,

white lines individuate clusters belonging to the same cluster at the 2nd level of the hierarchy, while red

lines divide different clusters at the 1st level. The representative keyword of the clusters at level 3 is

reported in bold in the respective rows, while all the specific keywords identified at the 4th hierarchical

level are shown within brackets. Clusters with less than 500 papers in total are not shown in the figure.

1950s, rising to around one paper every 315 in 2021. The growing interest in this topic is also reflected by

the increasing number of authors involved in such academic research. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the

fraction of authors producing such research has risen exponentially by more than one order of magnitude,

with almost one academic every 154 writing a paper mentioning the topic in 2021. This growth is also

seen in terms of raw number of publications and authors, as shown in Fig. S1 in the SM, where we

compare these numbers for the S2AG corpus and the (de)centralization dataset and find a stronger

exponential rise for the latter. Notice that for both papers and authors there are some periods with a

higher or lower increase in the fraction, showing spikes of interest at particular times. For example, in

Fig. 1(a,b) we can see that between the late 1970s and the 1980s the growth rate was faster than the

overall exponential fit.

In order to understand what has characterized the origins and evolution of the topic, we set to identify

topics and clusters of papers in the dataset by using the hSBM algorithm [20, 21] described in The pipeline

section. In the following analysis, we focus our attention only to years after 1950. Before this date there

are only around 100 papers in our (de)centralization dataset. The very first is a political science one from

1851 on local self-governments versus centralized governments [25]. Among the others in this period,

apart from around 50 papers that relate to (de)centralization in governments, organizations and states,

we have detected 30 papers that are actually false positives of the selection process. Considering also

how, in general, digitalization issues may have contributed to the small number of papers before 1950,

6



the reliability and coverage of the first 99 years of the data are unclear, and we opted to exclude them

from the analysis.

The consensus partition, obtained by collecting the outcomes of 100 runs of the hSBM algorithm,

consists of 7 hierarchical levels.

On the left of Fig. 1(c), we draw this hierarchy only until the 3rd level

(starting from the common root at level 0) for visualization clarity. More information on the number of

clusters in each level can be found in Sec. S2.1 in the SM, where we also conduct a comparative analysis

of the consensus partition with the individual runs of the hSBM algorithm.

On the right of Fig. 1(c), we also show the heatmap of the number of papers in time for each

cluster at the 3rd level, for a total of 16 different clusters after excluding other 5 clusters with less

than 500 papers not included in this analysis. The keywords shown in the heatmap have been manually

assigned to roughly characterize each cluster. In particular, the keywords between parentheses have been

chosen amongst the most frequent and most significant in the clusters at the 4th level, while the most

representative keyword at the 3rd level has been chosen and printed in bold. For details on how they

were assigned see The pipeline section and Sec. S2.2 in the SM.

In the following, we refer to a cluster at the 3rd level by its representative keyword (capitalized). As

shown by the hierarchy and by the horizontal red lines in the heatmap, clusters are divided in three

main branches. Looking at the two biggest branches, we can see a clear division between more STEM

oriented documents (top branch) and those in Political sciences, Social sciences, as well as Medicine

(bottom branch). Notably, a third smaller branch appears isolated, including papers at the intersection

of the other two, mostly about Wireless technologies and their applications. Going into more details,

in the STEM branch we notice how Cybersecurity, Control theory and Telecommunication (clusters 1,

6, and 10 respectively) are the ones producing most publications, with Blockchain (cluster 3) becoming

the most relevant in the last 5 years in terms of number of papers published per year. On the other

branch, Governance (cluster 12), including works in Political science, Education and Fiscal federalism, is

the most relevant cluster, while Environment, Social network analysis and Health clusters (respectively

clusters 13, 14, and 15) have produced a smaller number of papers. Furthermore, see Fig. S5 and Fig. S6

in the SM respectively for a similar plot done at the 4th level and for a bipartite hierarchical network

showing how clusters are represented in the various topics.

In Fig. 1(c) we have shown how the number of papers in each of these clusters has evolved over time.

Looking more into details of the early history of (de)centralization, the first papers adopting the term

have all been in the Social sciences branch, most importantly the Governance cluster, followed by Social

network analysis and Health. In the 1950s, indeed, there are 58 papers in Governance, which represents

the first cluster to adopt the term and use it extensively. Some of these articles refer, among other

things, to democracy as a form of centralized decision-making system [26]. Other clusters with more

than 10 papers refer to Social network analysis and Health, as seen for example in Kaufman’s “Toward

an interactional conception of community” [27]. Here, centralization is depicted as a force gradually

destroying the concept of community as a social unit. Notably, most of these papers have no citations

from other articles in the full corpus, with only some citations within the cluster of governance. In the

1960s, the largest growth is found again in the Governance and Health clusters, both reaching around

150 papers each in the decade. An important example of the former is that of Bachrach et al. [28], where

they highlight how different disciplines (i.e., social and political sciences) reach completely opposite


## conclusions about the (de)centralization of power. In the same decade (de)centralization also appears in


other relevant clusters, namely Social network analysis (50 papers) and Investments (29 papers), with a

7



significant number of citations in both directions between them. The term is picked up from the STEM

branch only later in the 1970s, especially through works in Control theory and Optimization [29], coming

significantly to a popular domain as Cybersecurity only in the 1980s.

(a)

T = 1970

1989

(b)

T = 1990

2007

(c)

T = 2008

2020

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

a

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

b

b

b

0   Robot swarms

1   Cybersecurity

2   Smart grids

3   Blockchain

4   Federated learning

5   Optimization

6   Control theory

7   Electricity

8   Investments

9   Edge-computing

10 Telecommunication

11 Wireless tech.

12 Governance

13 Environment

14 Social network analysis

15 Health

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Ka

b(T)

Figure 2:

Temporal evolution of the influence between clusters.

Average knowledge flows

Ka→b(T) from each cluster a to each cluster b at level 3 in the period T = 1970-1989 (a), T = 1990-2007

(b) and T = 2008-2020 (c), represented by the different colors according to the colorbar in the bottom

left part of the figure. A representative keyword for each cluster is reported on the bottom right part of

the figure. White lines denote clusters belonging to the same 2nd level cluster, whereas red lines mark

different branches at the 1st level. In the first period, little to no communication is happening between

different clusters. In recent years, more communication happens inside the same 2nd level cluster, and

towards the middle branch (cluster 11). However, little communication happens between the two other

branches, roughly representing the STEM and social sciences communities respectively.

We have seen how different domains have picked up the concept of (de)centralization at different times.

It is therefore natural to ask whether they developed such uses separately, or they influenced each other

in some way. The hierarchical clustering partially answers this question, as it gives a degree of separation

between domains based on citation and semantic information. However, significant information is still

present in the citations between papers of different clusters. We exploit this by computing knowledge

flows [23], whose aim is to quantify the transfer of knowledge given by the citations between groups of

papers through a comparison with a null model (for more details see The pipeline Section). We thus

study the average knowledge flow Ka→b(T) from papers in a cluster a, at level 3 of the hierarchy, in a

period of time T to future publications in another cluster b, represented by a number between 0 and 1

showing how significant this influence has been.

Here, in Fig. 2 we consider three different periods of time T: 1970-1989, 1990-2007 and 2008-2020.

Similarly to what we will do in the next figures, we have excluded the year 2021 as a source of knowledge

flow, because our dataset ends at the end of 2021, thus meaning that we cannot evaluate knowledge

flows from papers of 2021 to future years. In the figure, all clusters are ordered as in Fig. 1(c), with the

representative keywords shown in the legend below. For each period T, the color of the cell of row a and

column b of the heatmap refers to the average knowledge flow Ka→b(T) from papers in cluster a in that

period of time to future papers in cluster b, according to the colormap shown below.

Starting from the first period in Fig. 2(a), between 1970 and 1989 clusters have little to no influence

on the future of the other ones. We have previously seen how in these years the use of (de)central-

8



ization started to rise across some domains, mostly being Governance, Control theory, Social network


## analysis, Health, Cybersecurity, and Investments. However, apart from Governance and Control theory


(clusters 12 and 6), these clusters have low knowledge flow even to themselves, meaning that the use of

(de)centralization was only relegated to sporadic and not so influential papers in the literature. This

also confirms that the topic has appeared independently at this early stage.

Then, looking at the period from 1990 and 2007 in Fig. 2(b), we can see how much more transfer of

knowledge has occurred between clusters. As shown in Fig. 2(c), this trend is even more pronounced in

the last and more recent period, whose start coincides with the creation and rise of blockchain technolo-

gies. Interestingly, these transfers reflect the structure of the hierarchy and denote significant differences

between the high-level domains. The STEM branch (made of the clusters 0 to 10) shows clear com-

munication between clusters belonging to the same group both at the 2nd and 1st level (respectively

within white and red lines), whereas the right bottom branch shows almost no communication with the

other domains, especially after 2008. The only significant knowledge flow from this branch in the middle

period goes from Environment (cluster 13) to Optimization (cluster 5), while in the last period this is

only relegated between Environment and Smart grids (cluster 2). The middle branch instead shows clear

influence from the other two, and little influence towards them, especially in the last period.

Finally, notice how the highest knowledge flows between different clusters in Fig. 2(b) are from those

that, in the first period, were starting to be more influential. Similarly in the last period the clusters

with highest influence on other ones are mostly within the STEM branch. Overall, the heatmaps show

a clear decentralized birth of the concept of (de)centralization, appearing in different fields and domains

with little to no communication between each other. Instead, in recent years, we find a more coordinated

evolution, even though still sectorial in some cases, and mainly lead by STEM related clusters.

3.2

The case of Governance and Blockchain

(a)

Influence from cluster

(b)

Influence on cluster

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

Rank

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Blockchain

Governance

other clusters

Figure 3: Ranking the influence of Blockchain and Governance in the (de)centralization

literature. (a) Ranking in time of the influence coming from a cluster in the 3rd hierarchical level,

computed on the average knowledge flow Ka→•(Y ) from papers in cluster a published in the year Y

towards all other future papers. (b) Ranking in time of the influence to a cluster in the 3rd hierarchical

level, computed on the average knowledge flow K•→a(Y ) from papers published in the year Y towards

future papers in cluster a. The blockchain cluster, highlighted in blue, has become a central actor in the

recent literature on (de)centralization, supplanting the governance cluster, highlighted in red.

Having analyzed the concept of (de)centralization in the general academic landscape, we now focus

9



on two of the most important clusters in the history of this topic: Governance and Blockchain. As shown

in Fig. 1(c) and in Fig. S7 in the SM, these two clusters are among the biggest across time in terms of

number of papers. The Governance cluster has always been first or second with respect to the other

clusters at the 3rd level, while Blockchain was barely present before 2008, the year of the bitcoin white

paper [4]. After that, Blockchain gradually increased in size and had an exponential explosion after 2015,

coincidentally with the increasing hype around the technology and its applications, in particular bitcoin

and ethereum [30, 31, 32]. Finally, it has become the most productive cluster since 2019, surpassing

governance.

To better understand their role in the evolution of the literature on (de)centralization, we consider

the average knowledge flows between clusters for each year, that is looking at Ka→•(Y ), K•→a(Y ), and

K•→•(Y ), defined in Eq. (5). Therefore, in Fig. 3 we rank clusters year by year using Ka→•(Y ) in (a)

and K•→a(Y ) in (b), i.e., looking at how much the papers of a cluster a in a year Y have influenced,

on average, the future of all other clusters (a), or, vice versa, how much all clusters have influenced the

future of a (b). From these plots we can see how, on the one hand, Governance has been in the top

ranks until the late 1980s, both as a source and target of knowledge flows. However, in the early 1990s it

started to decrease in importance, reaching the bottom ranks in the 2000s, despite being the first cluster

in terms of number of papers each of these years. On the other hand, in Fig. 3(a) we notice that the

rise of Blockchain started only in 2010, being almost always outside of the (de)centralization literature


## discussion until this point. Then, very sharply, Blockchain becomes the first cluster in terms of influence


towards other clusters in 2013, maintaining its position in the following years. Hence, the literature

on Blockchain has been key in the development of the (de)centralization discussion in the most recent

years. Moreover, looking at Blockchain in Fig. 3(b), papers of other clusters before early 2000s have had

almost no impact on the scientific future of Blockchain. Interestingly, it has received a lot of influence

from publications between 2006 and 2012, that is about when the blockchain and bitcoin originated [4],

as well as after 2017, mostly due to the increasing amount of applications using blockchain in the most

diverse contexts in recent years. Finally, notice the loss of influence on Blockchain from papers between

2013 and 2016.

These results are corroborated by the time evolution of the average knowledge flow compared to the

overall average K•→•(Y ). Indeed, in Fig. S8 in the SM we show how Governance has been increasingly

important in influencing other clusters until the 1980s, while since the 1990s it has had a lower average

knowledge flow than the average among all clusters. Similarly to what shown by the ranks, after 2013

Blockchain starts to have a much higher influence towards the other clusters compared to the average.

Moreover, in Fig S9 in the SM we compare the average knowledge flow within the same cluster and

towards other clusters, isolating the clusters Governance and Blockchain from the rest of the clusters.

We find that on the one hand Governance has maintained a very high knowledge flow to future papers

in the same cluster throughout the years. On the other hand, starting from 1990s, the exchange in

knowledge flow towards and from other clusters has decreased. Blockchain, instead, has received a higher

than average knowledge flow from other clusters in the 2000s, starting to provide maximum knowledge

flow to itself and more than average to other clusters in the next and most recent decade.

So far we have seen how Governance has been influential in the early literature about (de)centraliza-

tion, and how Blockchain has risen in recent years as the most important influential cluster, contributing

in terms of knowledge flow towards other branches of literature. It is therefore a natural next step to

investigate with higher granularity which clusters in particular have influenced or have been influenced

10



by Governance first and Blockchain then, and see how these interactions have changed over time. We

start this analysis from the more recent case of Blockchain. This cluster started to appear only around

2008 with the bitcoin white paper [4]. Moreover, we notice a decrease in the influence on this cluster in

mid 2010s. We therefore divide the 2008–2020 time span in three parts, following the blockchain history:

2008–2014, representing the origin of blockchain applications before the advent of ethereum; 2015–2018,

when the field got more recognition thanks to ethereum and bitcoin; and the final 2019–2020 period,

in which we have seen the explosion of academic literature production and the widespread success of

multiple applications such as DeFi, NFTs and the metaverse.

Figure 4: Influences between Blockchain and the other clusters on (de)centralization. (a)

Change in the ranking of the most influenced clusters by Blockchain between its early period (2008-2014),

its middle period (2015-2018), and its late period (2019-2020), calculated using the average knowledge

flows Ka→b(T), where T is the selected period, and a is fixed to be Blockchain. (b) Change in the

ranking of the clusters having most influenced the Blockchain literature (same periods as in the previous

panel). In both cases, if Ka→b(T) = 0, we print a circle in the corresponding gray node and use a lighter

color in the respective link. Moreover, we print a star when 0.01 < Ka→b(T) ≤0.1, and two stars when

Ka→b(T) > 0.1.

In Fig. 4 we plot, in a decreasing order, which clusters have been most influenced by (a) and have

most influenced (b) Blockchain during the three periods. To this end, we use a Sankey diagram, showing

how the overall picture has changed in the three different phases. The plot is done using the average

knowledge flows Ka→b(T), where T is the selected period, while a and b are fixed to Blockchain in

Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(b) respectively.

Firstly, in Fig. 4(a) we analyze the influence of Blockchain on the these other clusters. The early

literature of Blockchain has had a strong impact on most of the clusters. As a matter of fact, there are

only a few cases where the average knowledge flow from Blockchain to another cluster is zero, shown

by a circle in the respective node and a lighter color in the corresponding link. We also notice that

Cybersecurity, Smart grids, Edge-computing, Wireless technologies, and Federated learning have a very

significant average knowledge flow from Blockchain, i.e., Ka→b(T) > 0.1, shown by the double stars, while

other clusters with 0.01 < Ka→b(T) ≤0.1 are represented with only one stars. Notice how Blockchain

11



has continued to have a big impact on these mentioned clusters, in particular Smart grids and Wireless

technologies, as well as Cybersecurity to a lesser extent. Looking altogether at the three periods, notice

how Cybersecurity and Edge-computing have lost influence from Blockchain over time. Moreover, in the

last period there is no significant knowledge flow to all other clusters, which is peculiar if we consider

that, for example, Federated learning and Edge-computing received a very significant knowledge flow

in the previous years. We argue that the recent decrease in knowledge flow is mostly due to the time

needed for a paper to attract citations, especially outside its own cluster. Additionally, we find that

some clusters, such as Health, Electricity, Control theory and Governance, have received no significant

influence from Blockchain in all these years, even if, Governance, for instance, has been second only to

Blockchain in terms of number of papers.

Secondly, in Fig. 4(b) we investigate the impact of the different clusters on Blockchain’s literature.

Cybersecurity, which has been one of the clusters that grew the most among all STEM clusters from the

1980s to the 2010s, has been stably the most influential cluster on Blockchain. The other top positions

have instead changed from the first period considered, with Smart grids, which did not even have any

influence on Blockchain at first, and Social network analysis becoming the most important clusters after

Cybersecurity. Notice also how Robot swarms and Investments have experienced an increase in knowl-

edge flow towards Blockchain, while the opposite has happened for Telecommunication, Optimization,

Governance and Health.

Comparing the two plots in Fig. 4, we find examples of only unidirectional influences between

Blockchain and the other clusters. The cluster of Social network analysis, third in position since 2015

to influence Blockchain, has not been influenced by it during the same period, which is also the case of

Robot swarms and Governance. A similar situation is found for Wireless technologies, that has been

strongly influenced by Blockchain over time, but only in recent years it has had a small impact on it.

Finally, we have conducted a similar analysis on the Governance cluster in Fig. S10 in the SM. In this

case, we consider three different periods of times: 1950–1980, that is the early stage when it was the most

important cluster overall; 1981-1990, when the amount of knowledge flow from Governance stopped to

increase, still remaining among the top in terms of ranking; and 1991–2000, in which its role diminished

and got surpassed by almost all other clusters by the end of the period. We do not find many noticeable

differences between the first two periods. Most clusters have no significant knowledge flow from and to

Governance, showing how (de)centralization developed independently in this cluster at first. Differently

from Blockchain, the top clusters to have interactions with governance are Environment, Social network


## analysis and Investments. Wireless technologies, Blockchain and Robot swarms have also been influenced


by Governance, but not vice-versa, apart from the sporadic case of Wireless technologies in the middle

period. We can also see that the influence from Governance has increased over time on clusters like

Blockchain, Optimization and Robot swarms, showing how the last years of the last century have been

important milestones for the future of these clusters.

4


## Discussion


In this paper we have developed and presented a framework that allowed us to quantitatively investigate

how different topics have risen in the (de)centralization literature and have influenced it. By exploiting

the S2AG corpus, we have shown that the literature on (de)centralization has exponentially increased in

the past 70 years, with an author in 154 contributing to articles on the topic in 2021. We have observed

12



a diversification of research fields engaging in (de)centralization studies, starting from Governance as

the most prolific field and gradually expanding to include various other disciplines.

Furthermore,

analyzing the evolution of knowledge flows between clusters, we have revealed a gradual increase of

influence between different fields. Initially, the various fields operated in isolation, with minimal cross-

disciplinary interaction. However, as the literature developed, we observed a growing interconnection

among these fields, with high knowledge flows especially within STEM subjects. Finally, we have shown

how Governance has lost its leading role in the (de)centralization literature in favour of Blockchain.

In fact, if Governance has remained mostly independent after the 1990s, without influencing or being

influenced by other clusters, Blockchain has been the most influential cluster for the last ten years, and

has recently become the most productive one.

A significant aspect of the framework we have developed is its versatility. The methodology can be

used to examine the evolution of any scholarly term or concept within academic literature. For example,

future work could use it to investigate the unfolding of such important topics as “gender inequality” and

“artificial intelligence”. Additionally, it can be utilized to explore the interplay between collective and

independent innovation in the field of science. Our pipeline relies on two key methods, the multilayer

hierarchical stochastic block model [21] and knowledge flows [23]. On the one hand, we employ the

first one to cluster documents and words in the dataset to identify different themes and topics, using

information of both citations between papers and of the words used in each document. On the other

hand, knowledge flows allow us to identify significant influences between clusters over time. With the

present paper, we publicly release the pipeline code to allow other researchers to perform similar analyses

on other concepts.

Our study presents some limitations which also represent directions for future work. First, we only

consider academic papers that directly mention the word (de)centralization or one of its variants (e.g.

“centralised”, “centralizing”, etc.). A broadened analysis could also include all articles cited by these

papers, in order to further understand the roots of this topic in the different fields. Moreover, we have

limited the semantic information to the words of document titles. Future studies could build on state

of the art large scale language models and Natural Language Processing techniques to extract more

information from the articles text (i.e., abstract and/or full text) and offer more detailed insights of their

content.

For example, a set of keywords could be used instead of the plain text of the title [33], so

as to better characterize papers and disambiguate terms that could have different meanings in different

contexts. In fact, the stochastic block model assigns one block to each node of the network [34, 21],

thus indirectly assigning the main meaning of a word to a certain topic, disregarding other nuances of

the word. A possible way to take this into account is to consider mixed-membership stochastic block

models [35, 36], where each node is assigned to a distribution or mixture of categories.

Finally, our methodology is able to identify direct flows of knowledge between two fields but misses

less straightforward chains of interaction.

For example, a field a could indirectly influence field b if

there is a direct knowledge flow between field a and another field c, which in turn influences field b.

The inclusion of temporally and causally compatible higher order interactions (i.e., more than pairwise)

is therefore an obvious route to improve on the current work.

Moreover, it would be interesting to

investigate the presence of citation biases or other spurious effects that have affected the evolution of

science.

For instance, the rise of interdisciplinary knowledge flows could have been favoured by the

presence of online easily-accessible papers. Furthermore, even though the combination of clustering and

knowledge flows are a powerful tool to detect statistically significant influence across fields and time, it is

worth noticing that citations can be noisy, and are not always a definitive indicator of cross-pollination.

13



We hence emphasize the need for complementary methods and approaches, such as qualitative historical

analyses and expert interviews, to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the development of

the concept of “decentralization” in different disciplines. We leave such research questions to future

work.

Overall, our analysis provides new insights in the origin and evolution of the ubiquitous concept

of (de)centralization, shedding light on the academic roots and influence of the blockchain technology.

Additionally, our pipeline can be used

to analyse quantitatively any other concept in the academic

literature, and can be easily combined with other text and network analysis tools. We therefore anticipate

that our results will be of interest to researchers working in a vast array of disciplines.

Availability of data and material

All the code used for the pipeline presented in this paper can be freely accessed and used through the

Github repository available at https://github.com/alberto-bracci/decentralization. The data

used in this work can be obtained applying the pipeline to the open-access S2AG corpus, available at

https://www.semanticscholar.org/. All computational work has been conducted on high memory

nodes of the HPC cluster of Queen Mary University of London [37].

Competing interests

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-

profit sectors.

Author’s contributions

G.D.B, A.Br., N.P., V.L. and A.Ba. designed the study. G.D.B. and A.Br. carried out the data collection.

G.D.B. and A.Br. performed the measurements. G.D.B, A.Br., N.P., V.L. and A.Ba. analysed the data,

discussed the results, and contributed to the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank the anonymous referees for their valuable input on an earlier version of the

manuscript.

14



List of abbreviations

COVID-19: COronaVIrus Disease of 2019. NFT: Non-Fungible Token. STEM : Science, Technology,

Engineering, Mathematics.

S2AG: Semantic Scholar Academic Graph.

MAG: Microsoft Academic

Graph. hSBM : hierarchical Stochastic Block Model. SM : Supplementary Material.

Additional Files

Supplementary Material

The interested reader can find more analyses in the Supplementary Material about the dataset (Section

S1) and the hierarchical clustering method (Section S2), as well as other results about the importance

of Governance and Blockchain in the history of (de)centralization (Section S3).


## References


[1] London,

H.:

The meaning of decentralization. The Social Studies 66(2),

55–59 (1975).

doi:10.1080/00220973.1943.11019391

[2] Schneider, N.: Decentralization: an incomplete ambition. Journal of Cultural Economy 12(4), 265–

285 (2019). doi:10.1080/17530350.2019.1589553

[3] Vaudenay, S.: Centralized or Decentralized? The Contact Tracing Dilemma. Cryptology ePrint

Archive, Paper 2020/531 (2020). https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/531

[4] Nakamoto, S.: Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business Review (2008)

[5] Nadini, M., Alessandretti, L., Di Giacinto, F., Martino, M., Aiello, L.M., Baronchelli, A.: Mapping

the nft revolution: market trends, trade networks, and visual features. Scientific Reports 11(1),

1–11 (2021). doi:10.1038/s41598-021-00053-8

[6] ElBahrawy, A., Alessandretti, L., Kandler, A., Pastor-Satorras, R., Baronchelli, A.: Evolution-

ary dynamics of the cryptocurrency market. Royal Society Open Science 4(11), 170623 (2017).

doi:10.1098/rsos.170623

[7] Mekacher, A., Bracci, A., Nadini, M., Martino, M., Alessandretti, L., Aiello, L.M., Baronchelli, A.:

How rarity shapes the nft market. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10243 (2022)

[8] Treisman, D.: The Architecture of Government: Rethinking Political Decentralization. Cambridge

University Press, New York (2007)

[9] Bray, M.: Control of education: Issues and tensions in centralization and decentralization. Compar-

ative Education: The Dialectic of the Global and the Local 1999, 207–232 (1999)

[10] Ebel, R.D., Yilmaz, S.: On the Measurement and Impact of Fiscal Decentralization vol. 2809. World

Bank Publications, Washington (2002)

15



[11] Saltman, R., Busse, R., Figueras, J.: Decentralization in Health Care: Strategies and Outcomes.

McGraw-hill education, New York (2006)

[12] Galloway, A.R.: Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization. MIT press, Cambridge,

Massachusetts (2004)

[13] Tanner, H.G., Kumar, A.: Towards decentralization of multi-robot navigation functions. In: Pro-

ceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4132–4137

(2005). IEEE

[14] Freeman, L.C.: Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social Networks 1(3), 215–239

(1978). doi:10.1016/0378-8733(78)90021-7

[15] Ammar, W., Groeneveld, D., Bhagavatula, C., Beltagy, I., Crawford, M., Downey, D., Dunkelberger,

J., Elgohary, A., Feldman, S., Ha, V., Kinney, R., Kohlmeier, S., Lo, K., Murray, T., Ooi, H.-H.,

Peters, M., Power, J., Skjonsberg, S., Wang, L.L., Wilhelm, C., Yuan, Z., van Zuylen, M., Etzioni,

O.: Construction of the literature graph in semantic scholar. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Annual

Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2018)

[16] Governance. Accessed June 6, 2022. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/

governance

[17] Sinha, A., Shen, Z., Song, Y., Ma, H., Eide, D., Hsu, B.-J., Wang, K.: An overview of microsoft

academic service (mas) and applications. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on

World Wide Web, pp. 243–246 (2015)

[18] Next

Steps

for

Microsoft

Academic

–

Expanding

into

New

Horizons.

Accessed

June

6,

2022.

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/academic/articles/

microsoft-academic-to-expand-horizons-with-community-driven-approach/

[19] Semantic Scholar’s paper Field of Study classifier. https://github.com/allenai/s2_fos. Accessed

June 8, 2022

[20] Gerlach, M., Peixoto, T.P., Altmann, E.G.: A network approach to topic models. Science Advances

4(7), 1360 (2018). doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaq1360

[21] Hyland, C.C., Tao, Y., Azizi, L., Gerlach, M., Peixoto, T.P., Altmann, E.G.: Multilayer networks for

text analysis with multiple data types. EPJ Data Science 10(1), 33 (2021). doi:10.1140/epjds/s13688-

021-00288-5

[22] Milojevi´c, S.: Quantifying the cognitive extent of science. Journal of Informetrics 9(4), 962–973

(2015). doi:10.1016/j.joi.2015.10.005

[23] Sun, Y., Latora, V.: The evolution of knowledge within and across fields in modern physics. Scientific

Reports 10(1), 12097 (2020). doi:10.1038/s41598-020-68774-w

[24] Bornmann, L., Haunschild, R., Mutz, R.: Growth rates of modern science: A latent piecewise

growth curve approach to model publication numbers from established and new literature databases.

Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 8(1), 224 (2021). doi:10.1057/s41599-021-00903-w

16



[25] Smith, J.T.: Local self-government and centralization: The characteristics of each; and its practical

tendencies as affecting social, moral, and political welfare and progress, including comprehensive

outlines of the english constitution. Moral, and Political Welfare and Progress (London, 1851),

27–51 (1851)

[26] Buchanan, J.M.: Individual choice in voting and the market. Journal of Political Economy 62(4),

334–343 (1954)

[27] Kaufman, H.F.: Toward an interactional conception of community. Social Forces 38, 8 (1959).

doi:10.2307/2574010

[28] Bachrach, P., Baratz, M.S.: Two faces of power. The American Political Science Review 56(4),

947–952 (1962). doi:10.2307/1952796

[29] ˇSiljak, D.D.: On decentralized control of large scale systems. In: Proceedings of the 7th Triennial

World Congress of the IFAC on A Link Between Science and Applications of Automatic Control,

Helsinki, Finland, 12-16 June, vol. 11, pp. 1849–1856 (1978). doi:10.1016/S1474-6670(17)66158-5

[30] Columbus,

L.:

Gartner

Hype

Cycle

For

Emerging

Technologies,

2016

Adds

Blockchain

&

Machine

Learning

For

First

Time.

Accessed

June

9,

2022.

https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2016/08/21/

gartner-hype-cycle-for-emerging-technologies-2016-adds-blockchain-machine-learning-for-first-ti

?sh=3d9bc1973f82

[31] McLean, S., Deane-Johns, S.: Demystifying blockchain and distributed ledger technology–hype or

hero? Computer Law Review International 17(4), 97–102 (2016). doi:10.9785/cri-2016-0402

[32] Ametrano, F.M.: Bitcoin, blockchain, and distributed ledgers: Between hype and reality. Available

at SSRN 2832249 (2016). doi:10.2139/ssrn.2832249

[33] Campos, R., Mangaravite, V., Pasquali, A., Jorge, A., Nunes, C., Jatowt, A.: Yake!

keyword

extraction from single documents using multiple local features. Information Sciences 509, 257–289

(2020). doi:10.1016/j.ins.2019.09.013

[34] Bouveyron, C., Latouche, P., Zreik, R.: The stochastic topic block model for the clustering of vertices

in networks with textual edges. Statistics and Computing 28, 11–31 (2018). doi:10.1007/s11222-016-

9713-7

[35] Airoldi, E.M., Blei, D., Fienberg, S., Xing, E.: Mixed membership stochastic blockmodels. In:

Koller, D., Schuurmans, D., Bengio, Y., Bottou, L. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing

Systems, vol. 21. Curran Associates, Inc., Vancouver, B.C., Canada (2008)

[36] Zhu, Y., Yan, X., Getoor, L., Moore, C.: Scalable text and link analysis with mixed-topic link mod-

els. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery

and Data Mining, pp. 473–481 (2013). doi:10.1145/2487575.2487693

[37] King, T., Butcher, S., Zalewski, L.: Apocrita - High Performance Computing Cluster for Queen

Mary University of London. (2017). doi:10.5281/zenodo.438045

17



Supplementary Information for “The Concept of

Decentralization Through Time and Disciplines: A

Quantitative Exploration”

Contents

1


## Introduction


1

2

The pipeline

2

3


## Results


5

3.1

The decentralized evolution of (de)centralization

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

3.2

The case of Governance and Blockchain

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

4


## Discussion


12

S1 Dataset

19

S2 Hierarchical clustering

22

S2.1 Partition overlap with the consensus partition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

S2.2 Keywords annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

S2.3 Results of the hSBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

S3 The importance of Governance and Blockchain in the history of (de)centralization

29

S3.1 Influence of Governance from and on other clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31



S1


## Dataset


In this section we report additional information on the S2AG corpus and the (de)centralization dataset

to complement the description in the article.

The dataset has been obtained by filtering the S2AG

corpus, considering only papers that include words with the string “centrali” in the title or in the


## abstract. To analyze which keywords are actually found, we count the number of occurrences of all the


words that include the string “centrali” in the dataset. In Table S1 we show the count of all keywords

appearing more than 1 000 times. The keywords with the highest frequencies are “(de)centralized” and

“(de)centralization”. In order of frequency, the next keywords are alternative british versions of these

terms. All other words are either less rare English words with the same root, such as “centralizing”, and

translation of such words in other languages.

Moreover, in Table S2 we report the number of publications in our dataset containing information

about each attribute. In Table S3 we report information on the publications’ fields of study, as originally

reported in the S2AG metadata. Each item can be classified in one or more fields. In the left table,

we report all single fields or pairs that have more than 1000 documents in our dataset (papers can be

classified in more than two fields, but the fields after the second are here discarded). In the right table

we instead see how many papers have each of the 19 fields as first field in their classification, showing

the predominance of Computer Science, and STEM subjects in general, in our dataset.

Finally, in

Fig. S1 we show the raw number of papers and authors each year for the full S2AG corpus, compared

with the (de)centralization dataset, showing how (de)centralization has a faster exponential growth than

the general academic literature as indexed by semantic scholar, as the different exponent of the fitted

exponential functions clearly show.

keyword

count

keyword

count

centralized

193 513

decentralized

175 397

decentralization

83 304

centralization

34 328

decentralisation

24 231

centralised

23 572

decentralised

23 190

centralisation

9 424

centralizing

6 519

descentralizacion

6 059

centralizer

4 969

centralis

4 850

centralize

4 647

descentralizado

4 295

decentralizing

4 126

descentralizaci´on

4 046

descentralizacao

3 935

decentralize

3 591

centralism

3 546

d´ecentralisation

2 860

centralise

2 676

descentralizada

2 669

centralizada

2 577

centralizers

2 544

centralizado

2 369

centrality

2 061

centralisee

2 023

decentralisee

1 888

descentraliza¸c˜ao

1 754

decentralise

1 571

centralizacao

1 496

centralizacion

1 472

centralizes

1 460

descentralizados

1 422

centralist

1 319

centralising

1 210

centralismo

1 013

Table S1: Number of occurrences of the keywords including the string “centrali” in the dataset.

19



Attribute

#Publications

title

425 144

paperAbstract

396 201

authors

421 611

year

423 431

inCitations or outCitations

305 639

fieldsOfStudy

377 720

doi

253 464

venue

143 802

journalName

234 888

Table S2: Number of papers (right column) in the (de)centralization dataset that contain information

on the listed attributes (left column). The attribute “inCitations” and “outCitations” correspond re-

spectively to received citations and given references.

fieldsOfStudy

#Publications

(Computer Science,)

99 230

(Political Science,)

49 987

(Engineering,)

37 469

(Medicine,)

29 223

(Business,)

29 134

(Economics,)

26 716

(Sociology,)

15 869

(Geography,)

13 211

(Mathematics,)

8 192

(Art,)

6 474

(Philosophy,)

5 767

(Environmental Science,)

5 708

(Engineering, Computer Science)

4 482

(History,)

3 941

(Psychology,)

3 702

(Physics,)

3 406

(Mathematics, Computer Science)

2 633

(Computer Science, Mathematics)

2 599

(Computer Science, Engineering)

2 362

(Biology,)

2 198

(Biology, Medicine)

2 025

(Materials Science,)

2 007

(Computer Science, Medicine)

1 825

(Chemistry,)

1 394

(Geology,)

1 194

(Business, Medicine)

1 167

(Business, Computer Science)

1 070

1st field

#Publications

Computer Science

121 600

Political Science

58 140

Engineering

48 458

Business

35 955

Medicine

35 639

Economics

31 842

Sociology

18 713

Geography

15 746

Mathematics

12 563

Art

7 521

Environmental Science

6 974

Philosophy

6 638

Psychology

5 115

Biology

4 944

History

4 587

Physics

4 355

Chemistry

2 484

Materials Science

2 477

Geology

1 393

Table S3: Number of papers in decreasing order in the dataset that have have been categorized with the

respective tuple of fields of study (left table) and with the respective first field (right table). Here we

have listed only the fields of study with more than 1000 papers in the dataset. Tuples with more than

two fields of study have been reduced considering only the first two.

20



(a)

(b)

10

7

10

7

10

6

10

6

Number of authors

Number of papers

10

5

10

5

10

4

10

4

10

3

10

3

S2AG

³

y(t) ∼e

0.054t´

S2AG

³

y(t) ∼e

0.059t´

(de)centralization

³

y(t) ∼e

0.089t´

(de)centralization

³

y(t) ∼e

0.101t´

10

2

10

2

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Figure S1: Comparison of the increase in number of papers (a) and authors (b) between the whole

S2AG corpus and the (de)centralization dataset. Exponential fits are shown as dashed line, with the

fitted values between brackets in the legend.

21



S2

Hierarchical clustering

S2.1

Partition overlap with the consensus partition

In the pipeline of our analysis, an important step is the use of the multilayer hierarchical stochastic

blockmodel (or hSBM). We run 100 iterations of the algorithm and derive the consensus partition to

increase robustness and generalizability of our results. This approach helps to account for the inherent

stochasticity and variability in the algorithm, ensuring that the identified partition is not an artifact of

a single run but a consistent representation of the data.

In Fig. S2, we present the maximum overlap and the Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) between

the document and word partitions obtained from different single iterations of the multilayer hSBM,

compared to the consensus partition. The panels (a) and (b) represent the maximum overlap, while

panels (c) and (d) show the NMI. Moreover, panels (a) and (c) represent the document clusters, while

panels (b) and (d) refer to the word clusters.

The values in each cell (i, j) of the panel indicate the

average overlap (with standard deviation among parentheses) for the single partitions at level i and the

consensus partition at level j. This provides a comprehensive view of the agreement between individual

iterations and the consensus partition. Moreover, the number of clusters at the various levels is displayed

in the figure.

One notable finding is the high average overlap between the single partitions and the consensus

partition, particularly at specific levels. This indicates a strong degree of agreement among the different

iterations and the consensus, suggesting robustness and reliability in the identified partitions.

Less

agreement is instead found in the low levels, which have a higher level of granularity. For example, at

level 0 the partitions have more than 500 clusters.

Furthermore, the NMI values provide insights into the information shared between the individual

partitions and the consensus one. Higher NMI values indicate a greater level of similarity and shared

information. The observed NMI values demonstrate a significant degree of agreement between the single

partitions and the consensus partition, further supporting the reliability of the identified partitions.

Overall, these results highlight the effectiveness of the consensus partition in capturing the shared

structure across multiple iterations of the hSBM. The high levels of overlap and NMI indicate a consistent

and reliable identification of partitions, contributing to a more accurate understanding of the underlying

patterns and structures within the analyzed data.

It should be noted that these results are specific to the current dataset and methodology employed.

Further investigations and comparisons with alternative approaches are necessary to validate and gener-

alize these findings. Nonetheless, the observed agreement between the single iterations and the consensus

partition provides a promising avenue for future research in network analysis and partitioning algorithms.

S2.2

Keywords annotation

As described in the main text, the hSBM algorithm produces a hierarchical clustering of both articles

and words (i.e. topics). Here we give more details on the procedure we used to manually assign keywords

to represent the different document clusters. First, for each cluster at level 4, we manually inspect the

most frequent words in the publications’ titles. We then look at the most significant topics represented

in the articles, as quantified by the normalized mixture proportion [21]. For instance, as we can see

22



depicted in Fig. S3(b) for the Blockchain cluster, or in Fig. S4(b) for the Governance cluster, we can

visualize the hierarchical tree of topics, highlighting the top 10 most significant ones. We have also

reported in the tree the significance level (> 1) with the * symbol. Moreover, for each of these topic,

(b)

1.0

(a)

Partition overlap (docs)

Partition overlap (words)

Single level 0

avg.N.clusters=589.48

0.63

(0.02)

0.58

(0.02)

0.56

(0.02)

0.56

(0.02)

0.55

(0.02)

0.54

(0.02)

0.53

(0.02)

0.59

(0.01)

0.57

(0.01)

0.54

(0.01)

0.49

(0.01)

0.44

(0.02)

0.42

(0.02)

0.42

(0.02)

0

Single level 1

avg.N.clusters=135.68

0.60

(0.01)

0.55

(0.02)

0.50

(0.02)

0.50

(0.02)

0.49

(0.02)

0.48

(0.02)

0.48

(0.02)

0.47

(0.01)

0.45

(0.02)

0.42

(0.02)

0.41

(0.02)

0.39

(0.02)

0.38

(0.02)

0.38

(0.02)

1

0.8

Single level 2

avg.N.clusters=42.33

0.60

(0.02)

0.64

(0.02)

0.58

(0.03)

0.56

(0.03)

0.56

(0.03)

0.54

(0.03)

0.54

(0.03)

0.48

(0.02)

0.45

(0.02)

0.39

(0.03)

0.37

(0.03)

0.36

(0.03)

0.35

(0.03)

0.35

(0.03)

2

Single level 3

avg.N.clusters=18.59

0.62

(0.01)

0.63

(0.03)

0.67

(0.04)

0.65

(0.05)

0.61

(0.05)

0.59

(0.05)

0.60

(0.05)

0.54

(0.02)

0.51

(0.03)

0.44

(0.03)

0.43

(0.04)

0.41

(0.04)

0.40

(0.04)

0.40

(0.04)

3

0.6

Single level 4

avg.N.clusters=7.45

0.67

(0.02)

0.67

(0.04)

0.72

(0.05)

0.69

(0.06)

0.65

(0.07)

0.61

(0.08)

0.62

(0.08)

0.65

(0.04)

0.63

(0.04)

0.57

(0.05)

0.55

(0.06)

0.55

(0.08)

0.53

(0.09)

0.53

(0.09)

4

Single level 5

avg.N.clusters=3.11

0.79

(0.05)

0.79

(0.06)

0.83

(0.06)

0.78

(0.08)

0.78

(0.11)

0.81

(0.12)

0.74

(0.16)

0.88

(0.08)

0.87

(0.09)

0.84

(0.11)

0.80

(0.14)

0.81

(0.14)

0.75

(0.16)

0.75

(0.16)

0.4

5

Single level 6

avg.N.clusters=1.52

0.97

(0.05)

0.97

(0.05)

0.97

(0.05)

0.96

(0.07)

0.96

(0.06)

0.97

(0.06)

0.94

(0.13)

0.99

(0.02)

0.99

(0.02)

0.99

(0.03)

0.99

(0.03)

0.99

(0.04)

0.98

(0.05)

0.98

(0.05)

6

0.2

Single level 7

avg.N.clusters=1.12

1.00

(0.02)

1.00

(0.02)

1.00

(0.03)

1.00

(0.01)

0.99

(0.06)

1.00

(0.01)

0.99

(0.06)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

7

Single level 8

avg.N.clusters=1.01

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

8

0.0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

(c)

(d)

NMI (docs)

NMI (words)

1.0

Single level 0

avg.N.clusters=589.48

0.89

(0.00)

0.85

(0.00)

0.82

(0.00)

0.81

(0.00)

0.80

(0.00)

0.77

(0.00)

0.76

(0.00)

0.90

(0.00)

0.88

(0.00)

0.86

(0.00)

0.83

(0.00)

0.77

(0.00)

0.72

(0.01)

0.72

(0.01)

0

Single level 1

avg.N.clusters=135.68

0.84

(0.01)

0.80

(0.01)

0.76

(0.01)

0.74

(0.01)

0.73

(0.01)

0.70

(0.01)

0.69

(0.01)

0.80

(0.01)

0.78

(0.01)

0.75

(0.01)

0.72

(0.01)

0.68

(0.01)

0.64

(0.01)

0.64

(0.01)

1

0.8

Single level 2

avg.N.clusters=42.33

0.84

(0.01)

0.82

(0.01)

0.77

(0.01)

0.74

(0.01)

0.72

(0.01)

0.67

(0.01)

0.65

(0.01)

0.78

(0.01)

0.73

(0.01)

0.67

(0.02)

0.62

(0.02)

0.56

(0.01)

0.50

(0.02)

0.50

(0.02)

2

Single level 3

avg.N.clusters=18.59

0.48

(0.03)

0.36

(0.02)

0.36

(0.02)

0.86

(0.01)

0.81

(0.02)

0.78

(0.02)

0.75

(0.02)

0.71

(0.03)

0.64

(0.03)

0.62

(0.02)

0.81

(0.01)

0.76

(0.01)

0.63

(0.02)

0.57

(0.03)

3

0.6

Single level 4

avg.N.clusters=7.45

0.88

(0.02)

0.84

(0.02)

0.74

(0.04)

0.64

(0.06)

0.54

(0.07)

0.29

(0.07)

0.29

(0.07)

0.89

(0.01)

0.84

(0.02)

0.80

(0.03)

0.75

(0.05)

0.70

(0.05)

0.56

(0.07)

0.53

(0.05)

4

Single level 5

avg.N.clusters=3.11

0.96

(0.03)

0.95

(0.03)

0.92

(0.05)

0.83

(0.10)

0.75

(0.17)

0.14

(0.22)

0.10

(0.20)

0.40

(0.29)

0.94

(0.02)

0.92

(0.03)

0.89

(0.03)

0.83

(0.06)

0.78

(0.10)

0.66

(0.18)

0.4

5

Single level 6

avg.N.clusters=1.52

0.99

(0.01)

0.99

(0.02)

0.98

(0.03)

0.97

(0.05)

0.96

(0.06)

0.93

(0.11)

0.67

(0.44)

1.00

(0.01)

1.00

(0.01)

0.99

(0.02)

0.98

(0.03)

0.97

(0.06)

0.71

(0.41)

0.64

(0.48)

6

0.2

Single level 7

avg.N.clusters=1.12

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

0.99

(0.08)

0.98

(0.14)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.01)

1.00

(0.01)

1.00

(0.01)

1.00

(0.03)

1.00

(0.02)

0.97

(0.14)

7

Single level 8

avg.N.clusters=1.01

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.00)

1.00

(0.02)

8

0.0

Consensus level 0

N.clusters=568

Consensus level 1

N.clusters=128

Consensus level 2

N.clusters=41

Consensus level 3

N.clusters=21

Consensus level 4

N.clusters=9

Consensus level 5

N.clusters=4

Consensus level 6

N.clusters=2

Consensus level 0

N.clusters=824

Consensus level 1

N.clusters=437

Consensus level 2

N.clusters=121

Consensus level 3

N.clusters=18

Consensus level 4

N.clusters=5

Consensus level 5

N.clusters=2

Consensus level 6

N.clusters=1

Figure S2: Overlap between single iterations of the hSBM with the consensus partitions.

Maximum overlap (a-b) and Normalized Mutual Information (c-d) between the document (a,c) and

word (b,d) partitions obtained from the different single iterations of the multilayer hSBM versus the

consensus partition. Such consensus partitionˆis obtained by maximizing the sum of overlaps with all

the partitions. The value of a cell in row i and column j in the panel refers to average (and standard

deviation within parentheses) for the single partitions at level i and the consensus partition at level j.

23



the top 20 most significant words are printed. We also look at the fields of study represented in each

cluster in time, as shown in Fig. S3(a) for Blockchain, or in Fig. S4(a) for Governance. Finally, we

look at the most important articles in the cluster, as represented by different metrics: overall number

of citations, number of citations within the (de)centralization dataset, highest knowledge flows towards

other clusters, and most central publications according to different network centrality measures (degree,

pagerank, betweenness, closeness, katz).

For clarity, we have then chosen one representative keyword for each cluster at the 3rd level. In

Table S4, we show the results of the keyword annotation procedure. Starting from the leftmost column,

we show each cluster at level 3 with its representative keyword and the number of publications in it, to

then show the annotated keywords in each cluster at level 4 (and the number of publications) present in

its hierarchical branch in separate rows. Clusters with less than 500 documents have been disregarded.

Blockchain cluster at level 3

(a)

Art

Biology

Business

Computer Science

103

Economics

Engineering

Environmental Science

Number of papers

102

Geography

Geology

History

Materials Science

101

Mathematics

Medicine

Philosophy

Physics

Political Science

100

Psychology

Sociology

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

(b)

1.5

normalized mixture proportion

1.0

0.5

*

virtual

bitcoin

incentive

transaction

*

new

demand

peer

p2p

fault

simulation

production

applications

trust

discovery

secure

attack

authentication

sharing

selection

sustainable

sensor

computing

blockchain

generation

intelligent

smart

grid

storage

0.0

industry


## database


privacy

internet

defined

key

action

identity

transformation

one

controlled

query

attacks

prevention

anonymous

digital

private

ecosystem

path

unit

grids

metering

tolerant

overlay

continuous

file

reputation

route

payment

credit

effort

material

iot

sdn

edge

preserving

networking

tax

contracts

automation

blockchains

scada

meter

deduplication

retrieval

encryption

black

securing

lightweight

share

meets

music

ecosystems

pre

cryptocurrency

authority

consumption

scenario

voting

approximation

asset

timing

liquidity

attribute


## databases


properties

currency

transactions

cryptocurrencies

soc

billing

storages

proof

personal

minimum

broadcast

0.5

error

trusted

ethereum

partially

forensic

accountable

things

mobility

ledger

taxation

markov

bounded

tolerance

approximate

counter

adverse

intellectual

intermediation

queries

publish

hole

ddos

malicious

fundamental

smarter

copyright

crypto

enabled

pon

macroeconomic

ami

powerline

cyberattacks

moving

incentives

hash

subscribe

similarity

archive

cash

compatible

fog

complexity

secured

defense

certificate

fraud

credibility

units

redistribution

example

delegation

agreement

isolation

industries

complementary

currencies

resilient

computational

smartgrid

1.0

bound

unstructured

deterministic

well

indexing

keep

usability

payments

collusion

transfers

dispatching

equalization

hyperledger

nilm

meters

demo

producer

intermediary

dos

sybil

probability

optimizing

integrity

store

concurrency

primer

license

assets

devices

riaps

saving

dimension

simulator

coin

plane

Figure S3: Keywords annotation for Blockchain. (a) Number of papers in time in each field of

study for the Blockchain cluster. (b) Hierarchical topic tree, highlighting the top 20 words of the 10 most

significant topics in the Blockchain cluster according to the normalized mixture proportion (in color).

This information is used to aid the keywords annotation manual procedure.

24



Governance cluster at level 3

(a)

Art

Biology

Business

Chemistry

Computer Science

102

Economics

Engineering

Environmental Science

Number of papers

Geography

Geology

History

Materials Science

101

Mathematics

Medicine

Philosophy

Physics

Political Science

100

Psychology

Sociology

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

(b)

1.0

normalized mixture proportion

0.5

*

governance

*

development

*

decentralization

0.0

monitoring

metropolitan

organizational

hybrid

local

contract

decentralizacja

decentralizacji

indonesia

adaptation

manipulator

based

study

money

manager

fiscal

china

regional

innovation

risk

competition

role

change

public

government

decentralisation

vertical

horizontal

concentration

world

relationship

case

community

perspective

fiat

macroeconomics

bargaining

forest

vision

indonesian

rural

comparative

centric

corporate

emergence

land

natural

sustainability

education

publicznych

nominal

dichotomy

5g

capital

investment

beijing

polycentric

segregation

political

polsce

java

manipulators

challenge

africa

institutional

level

reform

consensus

jako

finansów

samorz du

terytorialnego

strategic

balances

adoption

technological

conservation

arm

redundant

kalimantan

critical

implications

bubble

wright

neutrality

welfare

0.5

ambient

accessibility

south

india

federalism

changes

household

wage

company

examination

national

exploring

understanding

ran

domestic

transit

imbalance

success

traditional

politics

clearance

sulawesi

lagos

district

lessons

municipal

interest

conference

organisational

school

economy

european

international

po

czy

publicznej

centralizacja

dof

regency

helicopter

investigation

op

barter

indeterminacy

disequilibrium

labor

labour

procurement

london

marine

landscape

ecological

emerging

assessing


## introduction


race

agglomeration

brazil

federal

multinational

torque

kinematic

humanoid

period

sprawl

journey

monitor

barcelona

relocation

managerial

forestry

tourism

financial

participation

analiza

implication

communities

keynes

third

endogenous

1.0

ghana

territorial

style

employee

orientation

exploratory

za

problemy

administracji

sm

curtain

coastal

settlement

europe

bali

aceh

payload

trends

fronthaul

responsibility

chinese

relations

post

democracy

right

status

sitting

microfoundations

late

przyk adzie

agriculture

Figure S4: Keywords annotation for Governance. (a) Number of papers in time in each field of

study for the Governance cluster. (b) Hierarchical topic tree, highlighting the top 20 words of the 10

most significant topics in the Governance cluster according to the normalized mixture proportion (in

color). This information is used to aid the keywords annotation manual procedure.

25



keyword

count

sub-keywords

count

0

Robot swarms

5 843

routing, allocation, congestion

909

robot swarms, supply chain

4 120

planning, game theory

693

1

Cybersecurity

18 437

cybersecurity, peer2peer, fault tolearance, attacks

15 189

cloud, security

3 248

2

Smart grids

867

smart grids, energy trading, blockchain

867

3

Blockchain

9 637

blockchain, cryptocurrency, ethereum, bitcoin

9 634

4

Federated learning

2 043

federated learning, deep learning, adversarial networks

1 565

5

Optimization

5 878

control theory, equilibrium

926

statistical learning, optimization, detection

3 065

heterogeneity, links, web, health

1 887

6

Control theory

19 758

control theory, nonlinear dynamics

8 634

navigation, flocking, formation

9 661

discrete-event systems, decision making

1 463

7

Electricity

8 090

electricity, grids

8 090

8

Investments

8 394

networks, connectivity, synchronization, routing, topology

3 058

investments, money, risk, algorithm

5 336

9

Edge-computing

2 970

edge-computing, cloud-computing

2 970

10

Telecommunication

18 804

cellular networks, communication, radio

12 446

wireless, localization

1 262

routing, protocols, security

5 096

11

Wireless technologies

2 166

spanish

1 251

wireless, cybersecurity, allocation, decision making

915

12

Governance

40 045

governance, fiscal federalism, government, development

19 371

natural resources, education, governance

20 674

13

Environment

15 386

routing

1 278

renewable energy, wastewater, environment

8 348

portoguese, latin america

5 760

14

Social network analysis

10 375

supply chain, manufacturing, pricing

3 938

social network analysis, organizations, firms

6 437

15

Health

12 343

algebra, healthcare, symptoms

6 291

hospitals, HIV, cancer, surgery

6 052

Table S4: Results of the keywords annotation procedure. Clusters at 3rd level, with associated

manually annotated keyword and number of publications, together with the same information for each

of the clusters at hierarchical level 4 in its branch of the hierarchy. Single horizontal lines denote clusters

at the 2nd hiearchical level, while the double horizontal lines denote the three branches at the 1st level.

Clusters with less than 500 documents have been disregarded.

26



S2.3


## Results of the hSBM


In this section we report some additional visualizations of the results of the hSBM algorithm on the

(de)centralization dataset. In Fig. S5 we show the number of papers in each cluster at hierarchical level

4, together with the hierarchical tree and the manually annotated keywords. In Fig. S6 we show the

bipartite network of documents and words, together with the results of the hSBM algorithm and the

manual annotation procedure. This figure shows how the various clusters are represented in terms of

topic frequency. Nodes on the left, indeed, represent documents, while those on the right title words.

Notice that, to proper represent topic frequencies, multiple instances of the same word are considered,

one for each document the word is in. Links are colored based on the doc cluster they start from. On top

of the bipartite network between docs and words, we show a tree where squares represent clusters/topics

at various hierarchical levels as a result of the hSBM, starting from the common root to level 3.

routing, allocation, congestion

robot swarms, supply chain

planning, game theory

cybersecurity, peer2peer, fault tolearance, attacks

cloud, security

smart grids, energy trading, blockchain

blockchain, cryptocurrency, ethereum, bitcoin

federated learning, deep learning, adversarial networks

control theory, equilibrium

statistical learning, optimization, detection

heterogeneity, links, web, health

control theory, nonlinear dynamics

navigation, flocking, formation

discrete-event systems, decision making

electricity, grids

networks, connectivity, syncronization, routing, topology

investments, money, risk, algorithm

edge-computing, cloud-computing

cellular networks, communication, radio

wireless, localization

routing, protocols, security

spanish

wireless, cybersecurity, allocation, decision making

governance, fiscal federalism, government, development

natural resources, education, governance

routing

renewable energy, wastewater, environment

portoguese, latin america

supply chain, manufacturing, pricing

social network analysis, organizations, firms

algebra, healthcare, symptoms

hospitals, HIV, cancer, surgery

0

10

3

Number of papers

10

2

10

1

10

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Figure S5: Results of hSBM at the 4th hierarchical level. Heatmap of the number of papers in

each cluster at level 4, together with the manually annotated keywords and the hierarchical tree resulting

from the clustering algorithm.

27



Figure S6: Visualization of the results of the hSBM algorithm. Bipartite network of documents

and words, where nodes and links are colored based on the document cluster (at hierarchical level 3)

they start from. Multiple instances of the same word are considered, one for each document the word is

in. Word nodes within a topic at level 3 are ordered as the document clusters for visualization purposes.

On top of the bipartite network, the hierarchy of topics and document clusters are represented on the

word and document side respectively, shown as a network of square gray nodes. On the bottom of the

figure, the legend with the 10 most frequent words of each topic is displayed.

28



S3

The importance of Governance and Blockchain in the his-

tory of (de)centralization

In this section we report some additional and complementary plots to show the importance of the

Blockchain and Governance clusters in the academic literature on (de)centralization. In Fig. S7(a) we

show the number of papers in time for three groups of documents: Blockchain, Governance and the whole


## dataset. Moreover, in Fig. S7(b) we plot the rank of each cluster in terms of yearly number of papers,


highlighting Blockchain and Governance. Both figures clearly show how Governance has been the most

productive cluster in the literature for a long time, only to be replaced by Blockchain in recent years.

In Fig. S8 we look at knowledge flows, plotting their value instead of their rank (as done in Fig. 3

in the main text). We plot the time evolution of Ka→•(Y ), where a is Governance or Blockchain, in

comparison to K•→•(Y ) in Fig. S8(a). This shows the average influence that the cluster in a certain year

has towards all clusters in the future. We similarly compare the average influence of all other clusters

on the future of these two clusters looking at K•→a(Y ) in Fig. S8(b). We can see from these figures how

Governance has been increasingly important in influencing other clusters until the 1980s, while since

after the 1990s it has had a lower knowledge flow than the average among all clusters, despite being the

first cluster in terms of number of papers in all this time. The case of Blockchain is opposite: after 2013

it starts to have a much higher influence towards the other clusters compared to the average one over all

clusters, while the other clusters after 2004 have had an average knowledge flow towards it.

In Fig. S9, we show the average knowledge flow of a cluster a to the future, while also distinguishing

the influence on the cluster itself. Fig. S9(a) focuses on the comparison of knowledge flows between

Governance and other clusters, while Fig. S9(b) repeats the analysis on Blockchain. Starting from the

1970s, we observe a substantial knowledge flow within the Governance cluster towards future Governance

papers (blue line), consistently close to 1. In comparison, other clusters have had a lower impact on

their future papers during this period (magenta line), with a more noticeable and increasing influence

in recent years. Examining the knowledge flow from Governance to other clusters (red line), we find

that it has consistently been low, peaking in the 1990s.

However, after the year 2000, the impact

on other clusters has vanished. Conversely, all other clusters have exerted an increasing influence on

all clusters excluding themselves (gray line), indicating their higher impact on other areas and their

more efficient interdisciplinary communication. Hence, while the number of papers in Governance has

remained high, its impact has largely been confined to the same cluster after the 1990s. Conversely, the

opposite trend is observed for other clusters, where their influence on other disciplines has progressively

grown.

Furthermore, the influence of other clusters on Governance (black line) has been negligible

since the 1990s, reinforcing the isolation of the Governance cluster. In contrast, the Blockchain cluster,

gaining significance in the 2000s (blue line in Fig. S9(b)), has received substantial knowledge flow from

other clusters (black line), particularly during that period. This influx of knowledge has contributed to

the emergence of blockchain technologies, which have subsequently made a significant impact on other

clusters in recent years, as noticed by the high knowledge flow from Blockchain to other clusters (red

line), thereby driving the recent scientific advancements in decentralization.

29



(a)

(b)

No. papers

10

4

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

Blockchain

Governance

(de)centralization

10

3

No. papers

Rank

10

2

10

1

Blockchain

Governance

other clusters

10

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Figure S7: Blockchain and Governance are the most productive clusters. (a) Number of papers

in time for the Blockchain cluster, the Governance cluster and the full (de)centralization dataset. (b)

Rank by number or papers in time for different clusters, highlighting Blockchain and Governance. Both

plots show the central role of these two clusters in the literature on (de)centralization, and how they

have exchanged roles, with Blockchain becoming the most productive field in recent years.

(a)

Influence from cluster

(b)

Influence on cluster

0.25

0.25

Blockchain

Governance

average in (de)centralization

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Figure S8: Influence of Governance and Blockchain from and on other clusters in time.

Average knowledge flow towards other clusters in the future in time from a cluster (a) or to a cluster

(b), the latter being either Blockchain (in blue) or Governance (in red), while in gray the average over

the (de)centralization dataset is plotted.

(a)

Influence from and on Governance

(b)

Influence from and on Blockchain

1.0

1.0

Blockchain on Blockchain

Blockchain on others

others on Blockchain

others on others

(not themselves)

others on themselves

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

Governance on Governance

Governance on others

others on Governance

others on others

(not themselves)

others on themselves

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Year

Figure S9: Influence of Governance and Blockchain from and on other clusters in time.

Average knowledge flows from or to Governance ((a)) or Blockchain ((b)) compared to the other clusters,

distinguishing between the knowledge flow to the same cluster or to all other ones.

30



S3.1

Influence of Governance from and on other clusters

Here we report an additional plot looking at the role of Governance with respect to the other clusters.

In particular, we replicate Fig. 4 in the main text for Governance instead of Blockchain. Given the


## results on the predominant role of Governance as an influence on other clusters before the year 2000,


we look at the following three periods of time: from 1950 to 1980, from 1981 to 1990 and from 1991 to

2000, highlighting different interactions with other clusters both in terms of source and destination of

knowledge flows. For instance, the Blockchain cluster is the second most influenced cluster by Governance

in the 1990s, highlighting its role in the foundations of the field. However, the rankings are generally

more stable than what observed in Fig. 4 in the main text for the case of the Blockchain cluster.

Figure S10:

The

influence

from/on

Governance

with

regards

to

the

rest

of

the

(de)centralization literature.

(a) Change of the ranking of the clusters most influenced by the

Governance literature between its early period (1950-1980), its middle period (1981-1990), and its late

period (1991-2000), calculated using the average knowledge flows Ka→b(T), where T is the selected

period, and a is fixed to Governance. (b) Change of the ranking of the most influential clusters on

the Governance literature between its early period (1950-1980), its middle period (1981-1990), and its

late period (1991-2000), calculated using the average knowledge flows Ka→b(T), where T is the selected

period, and b is fixed to Governance.

In both cases, if Ka→b(T) = 0, we print a circle in the cor-

responding gray node and use a lighter color in the respective link. Moreover, we print a star when

0.01 < Ka→b(T) ≤0.1, and two stars when Ka→b(T) > 0.1.

31