Do altmetric scores reflect article quality? Evidence from the UK

Research Excellence Framework 2021

Mike Thelwall

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6065-205X m.thelwall@wlv.ac.uk



Kayvan Kousha

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4827-971X k.kousha@wlv.ac.uk



Mahshid Abdoli

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9251-5391 m.abdoli@wlv.ac.uk



Emma Stuart

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4807-7659 emma.stuart@wlv.ac.uk



Meiko Makita

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2284-0161 meikomakita@wlv.ac.uk



Paul Wilson

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1265-543X pauljwilson@wlv.ac.uk



Jonathan Levitt

Statistical Cybermetrics and Research Evaluation Group, University of Wolverhampton, UK.

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4386-3813 j.m.levitt@wlv.ac.uk



Altmetrics are web-based quantitative impact or attention indicators for academic articles

that have been proposed to supplement citation counts. This article reports the first

assessment of the extent to which mature altmetrics from Altmetric.com and Mendeley

associate with journal article quality. It exploits expert norm-referenced peer review scores

from the UK Research Excellence Framework 2021 for 67,030+ journal articles in all fields

2014-17/18, split into 34 Units of Assessment (UoAs). The results show that altmetrics are

better indicators of research quality than previously thought, although not as good as raw

and field normalised Scopus citation counts. Surprisingly, field normalising citation counts can

reduce their strength as a quality indicator for articles in a single field. For most UoAs,

Mendeley reader counts are the best, tweet counts are also a relatively strong indicator in

many fields, and Facebook, blogs and news citations are moderately strong indicators in some

UoAs, at least in the UK. In general, altmetrics are the strongest indicators of research quality

in the health and physical sciences and weakest in the arts and humanities. The Altmetric

Attention Score, although hybrid, is almost as good as Mendeley reader counts as a quality

indicator and reflects more non-scholarly impacts.



Keywords: Altmetrics, Research Excellence Framework, REF2021, alternative indicators,

scientometrics, bibliometrics, field normalised citations.


## Introduction


Altmetrics are quantitative indicators for research outputs that are not based on traditional

citations from journal articles but are usually derived from web sources. They are widely

found in publisher websites, usually sourced from the Altmetric.com or PlumX data providers,

although CrossRef also provides relevant data (Ortega, 2018). Altmetrics can also be found in

the free scholarly search engine Dimensions. Most academics seem to be aware of some of

them (Aung et al., 2019), testifying to their importance within the scholarly communication

ecosystem. Evidence about the information contained in altmetrics is needed for them to be

interpreted effectively, however (Haustein et al., 2014c; Sud & Thelwall, 2014). This is

complicated by a lack of quality control for most and the potential for many of them to be

gamed or infiltrated by irrelevant data (Roemer & Borchardt, 2015; Wouters & Costas, 2012).

Nevertheless, they may have value for formative evaluation, if used carefully (Bar‐Ilan et al.,

2018).

The rationale for citation-based impact indicators is that citations can reflect the cited

document influencing the citing document, so citation counts partly reflect scholarly influence

or impact. Although perfunctory citations also occur, it is still reasonable to use citation

counts as scholarly impact indicators if relatively trivial citations can be ignored as “noise” in

the system (Moed, 2006). In contrast, the various altmetrics have been hypothesised to

reflect different dimensions of attention or impact, and especially societal impact (Priem et

al., 2011; Kousha, 2019). Most also have the advantage of appearing before citation counts,

giving earlier evidence of interest or impact. There is substantial evidence that one altmetric,

Mendeley reader counts, is a scholarly impact indicator and a partial educational impact

indicator for journal articles primarily because Mendeley reader counts correlate moderately

or strongly with citation counts for articles in most academic fields (Thelwall & Sud, 2016) and

can be used as early scholarly impact indicators (Zahedi et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the value

and best interpretations of all other altmetrics are uncertain. Tweeter counts, for example,

although having moderate correlations with citation counts in some fields (Costas et al., 2015;

Haustein et al., 2014a), seem to reflect academic interest and author/publisher dissemination

activities in many fields rather than the initially hypothesised public interest (e.g., Lemke et

al., 2022), despite most Twitter users being non-academics. Biomedical research might be an

exception because this research is widely tweeted by the public (Mohammadi et al., 2018;

see also: Haustein et al., 2014b).

The reason for the ongoing uncertainty about how to interpret altmetrics is a lack of

relevant data. Although there are many ways to partially evaluate altmetrics (Sud & Thelwall,

2014), there is no large-scale systematic evidence of the attention given to, or societal impact

of, academic research. Thus, there is no direct way to check which altmetrics can reasonably

be claimed to be indicators of these, or in which fields. Given this absence, the most common

approach has been to correlate altmetric scores with citation counts, as an indicator of

scholarly impact, on the basis that positive correlations would at least indicate that altmetric

scores are non-random and scholarly-related to some extent. This is almost a paradox since

the value of most altmetrics would be in being different from citation counts, but an overlap

could nevertheless be expected for any scholarly-related indicator (Thelwall, 2016). Other


## methods previously used have included content analyses of individual sources (e.g., tweets:




Holmberg & Thelwall, 2014), and predicting future citation counts from early altmetric scores

(Akella et al., 2021; Thelwall & Nevill, 2018).

Since citation counts are not direct measures of scholarly impact, a better way to

evaluate altmetrics would be to correlate them against peer review quality scores for journal

articles. This is more direct and may reveal altmetrics that reflect dimensions of quality not

well captured by citations. This is plausible since significance (i.e., impact, whether scholarly,

societal or other) is one of the three core components of quality, with the other two being

rigour and originality (Langfeldt et al., 2020). One non peer reviewed publication has

previously done this. It correlated a range of altmetrics, including Mendeley reader counts

and tweet counts from Altmetric.com, with Research Excellence Framework (REF) expert peer

review quality scores for 19,580 journal articles from 2008 in 36 field-based Units of

Assessment (UoAs). It found only relatively low correlations with quality scores, with the

highest in Clinical Medicine (rho=0.441) and Biological Sciences (rho=0.363), (HEFCE, 2015),

undermining previous claims for the usefulness of altmetrics. A limitation of the analysis was

that Altmetric.com started in 2011, so its data for 2008 may have been incomplete. Moreover,

given the relatively low numbers of articles in some UoA, some results may have been

imprecise.

The current article updates the REF2014 technical report with more current REF2021


## data on the basis that altmetrics have matured over time and Altmetric.com data may be


more comprehensive after 2011. Data maturation is likely because the only year previously

analysed, 2008, precedes Altmetric.com’s foundation in 2011 and immediately follows

Mendeley’s creation in 2007. The primary research question is to assess the overall value of

altmetrics. The second relates to the Altmetric Attention Score because, although it is a hybrid

indicator and therefore not useful to study from a theoretical perspective, it is

Altmetric.com’s flagship indicator and one of the best known altmetrics. It is important to

understand whether it has value from the user perspective, given that many researchers must

notice and perhaps consult it. The final research question benchmarks against citation counts,

as the most widely used research impact indicator.

• RQ1: How useful are Altmetric.com altmetrics as indicators of research quality in all

fields?

• RQ2: How useful is the Altmetric Attention Score as an indicator of research quality in

all fields?

• RQ3: How do altmetrics compare to raw and field normalised citation counts as

indicators of research quality in all fields?


## Methods



## Data


Provisional REF2021 scores from March 2022 for 148,977 journal articles from 2014 to 2020

were supplied by the REF team as part of an unrelated project. This includes many duplicate

articles that were scored separately because they were supplied by different authors. For

security reasons, University of Wolverhampton submissions were excluded. Each score had

been agreed by two subject experts, usually senior researchers, from one of the 34 UoAs and

agreed at the UoA level, with norm referencing within each UoA. Thus, the scores are carefully

calibrated expert judgements. Each output was scored as 0 unclassified, 1* recognised

nationally, 2* recognised internationally, 3* internationally excellent, or 4* world-leading in

terms of originality, significance, and rigour (REF2021, 2021). Since the score 0 could be



allocated to a very weak article or a stronger article with a technical noncompliance, the few

articles with score 0 were removed. Articles without Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) were also

excluded (difficult to match Altmetric.com data), as were articles not in Scopus (needed for

the citation RQ). Duplicate articles within a UoA were removed, allocating the remaining

article the median score of all copies (randomly rounding up or down when the median was

a x.5 fraction). Articles after 2018 were excluded because of insufficient time to attract a

stable number of citations (Wang, 2013). Exact numbers for each field and year are in the

supplementary materials but there were low numbers for the arts and humanities UoAs.



Altmetric scores were obtained for each article 2014-18 by querying its DOI with the

Altmetric API (Robinson-García et al., 2014) in Webometric Analyst (https://lexiurl.wlv.ac.uk/)

for Altmetric’s public record. Altmetric was chosen in preference to PlumX for its free API that

allowed batch downloading of records for all articles. Articles without a record in

Altmetric.com were excluded from the 2014-18 data. It would also have been reasonable to

assume that such articles had altmetric scores of 0, but some may also have had Altmetric

records with a different DOI (either configured differently or for a different version of the

article, such as a conference paper, preprint, or update). For example, UoA 11 Computer

Science and Informatics had a large minority of articles without DOI matches in Altmetric.com.

Investigations of these articles found that they sometimes had Altmetric scores associated

with an ArXiv DOI for the preprint of the article. Altmetric.com presumably knew the official

DOI but used the preprint DOI as the primary source for API queries and the online record.

Thus, assuming articles with DOIs without Altmetric.com API query matches would have

altmetric scores of 0 would sometimes be false.

Since Altmetric’s Mendeley data may not be systematically updated for all DOIs,

Mendeley records were captured directly from Mendeley using its API, again in Webometric

Analyst for each article 2014-17 (see below for the rationale for excluding 2018). Finally, for

comparison, Scopus citation counts from January 2021 for each article 2014-17 were also

added by DOI. Sample sizes are in Table 1.



Table 1. Numbers of journal articles used in the analyses. Main Panel data excludes duplicates

within UoAs and the 2014-18 data excludes articles without Altmetric.com records.

2014-18

articles

1: Clinical Medicine

5735

7068

2: Public Health, Health Services and Primary Care

2259

2824

3: Allied Health Professions, Dentistry, Nursing and Pharmacy

5517

6216

4: Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience

4662

5499

5: Biological Sciences

3744

4610

6: Agriculture, Food and Veterinary Sciences

1747

1972

7: Earth Systems and Environmental Sciences

2205

2522

8: Chemistry

2063

2162

9: Physics

3090

3333

10: Mathematical Sciences

2922

2037

11: Computer Science and Informatics

2504

1749

12: Engineering

10036

6236

13: Architecture, Built Environment and Planning

1280

1038

14: Geography and Environmental Studies

1766

2099

15: Archaeology

279

331

16: Economics and Econometrics

913

760

17: Business and Management Studies

5868

4847

18: Law

852

877

19: Politics and International Studies

1224

1417

20: Social Work and Social Policy

1570

1834

21: Sociology

720

848

22: Anthropology and Development Studies

469

526

23: Education

1592

1666

24: Sport and Exercise Sciences, Leisure and Tourism

1368

1625

25: Area Studies

223

241

26: Modern Languages and Linguistics

476

366

27: English Language and Literature

367

261

28: History

535

535

29: Classics

50

28

30: Philosophy

368

348

31: Theology and Religious Studies

83

59

32: Art and Design: History, Practice and Theory

522

414

33: Music, Drama, Dance, Performing Arts, Film and Screen Studies

291

217

34: Communication, Cultural & Media Studies, Library & Information Man.

436

465

Main Panel A (UoAs 1-6)

21327

25239

Main Panel B (UoAs 7-12)

22145

17353

Main Panel C (UoAs 13-24)

17494

17392

Main Panel D (UoAs 25-34)

3324

2905

Total (UoAs 1-34)

67736

67030

2014-17

articles

Unit of Assessment or Main Panel

The Scopus citation counts were converted into Normalised Log-transformed Citation

Scores (NLCS) to give a theoretically better citation-based indicator (Thelwall, 2017). Field

normalisation of citations in scientometrics is common because fields citation rates vary



between fields and the normalisation process factors this out (Waltman et al., 2011). NLCS

values were obtained by first log-transforming all citation scores with log(1+x) to reduce

skewing, then averaging the log-transformed values separately for each Scopus narrow field

and year. Each article NLCS was then calculated as its log-transformed citation count divided

by the average for its field and year. An article in multiple fields would instead have its log(1+x)

divided by the average over all relevant fields. The fields used for this were Scopus narrow

fields (Scopus, 2022), which are approximately 325 (depending on year) different categories.

An NLCS value of 1 indicates world average citation impact, irrespective of the field and year

of the article and the scores are comparable between years and fields.


## Analysis


Spearman correlations were used to assess the strength of association between REF2021

expert peer review scores and altmetric scores for all research questions. Spearman

correlations were used instead of Pearson correlations since citation and altmetric data can

be highly skewed (Thelwall & Wilson, 2016). Whilst correlation does not show cause-and-

effect, positive Spearman correlations suggests that articles with a higher altmetric or citation

count tend to have higher REF2021 quality scores. Correlations were calculated separately for

each year to reduce the influence of time on the results. For citations counts, at least a three-

year window is usually adequate to get reliable results (Wang, 2013), so only articles from

2014-17 were used for the citation data and, since it is compared to the Mendeley API data,

the same was applied to the latter. To keep the three-year window, articles from 2014-18

were used for the Altmetric.com data collected in 2022. For ease of reporting masses of


## results, the median correlation across all relevant years was reported, but results for


individual years are in the supplementary material.


## Results


Correlations

The correlation results are shown here for the altmetrics supplied by the Altmetric API except

those for which the median correlations were below 0.1 for all UoAs: Pinners, Questions,

GPlus. The remaining results are displayed in themed batches because there is too much data

to fit on one graph. A common scale is used for ease of comparison between graphs.

Both Scopus citations and Mendeley readers have similar levels of correlation with

REF2021 provisional quality scores in most UoAs, but the Scopus correlations are higher in all

except two (17, 34). Mendeley readers seem to be particularly weak in the humanities. This

might be because Mendeley is a reference manager and humanities reference styles are often

based on discussions in footnotes rather than standard format references. Thus, Mendeley is

less useful to such scholars and its records may be sparser (Thelwall, 2019). The relatively low

correlations for Mendeley in Mathematical Sciences and Computer Science and Informatics

are presumably due to the LaTeX document formatting language commonly used in these

areas (also in parts of Physics), for which Mendeley would be less use. The results confirm

that citations and Mendeley readers have the most information value in medicine, health,

physical sciences, moderate value in mathematics, engineering, and social sciences, and little

in the arts and humanities.

Comparing the article quality correlations for the NLCS field normalised citation counts

with those for the raw Scopus citation counts, it is surprising that raw citation counts are

better indicators of research quality in over two thirds of UoAs (with nine exceptions: 10, 16,



18, 21, 25, 28, 31, 32, 33). This is surprising because field normalised indicators are designed

to be fairer than raw citation counts by taking into account the publication field, so an article

does not have an advantage for being published in a high citation speciality. In this case the

correlations are calculated within field-based UoAs, so field normalisation should make little

difference. Nevertheless, articles submitted to UoAs by their UK authors can be

interdisciplinary or submitted to out-of-field UoA (e.g., because the author is a statistician in

a medical department), which the NLCS normalisation process should help with. Mostly lower

correlations for NLCS suggest that the field normalisation process is flawed.  This is plausible

since Scopus categorises articles by journal, but article-level classifications more closely align

with underlying topics (Klavans & Boyack, 2017). Thus, the results suggest that field

normalisation, at least based on articles classified by journal, is usually counterproductive

when analysing articles from a single broad field and year.



Figure 1. Scopus citations (count and NLCS) and Mendeley readers (from Mendeley API):

Spearman correlations with provisional REF2021 scores, calculated separately for each UoA

and year, with the median across years reported. UoA 29 results have been removed for single

figure sample sizes.



The Altmetric.com data for Mendeley gives similar correlations to the Mendeley API data

(Figure 2). Altmetric.com also counts readers from CiteULike, but this is used by many fewer

people, which is the likely cause of lower correlations with REF2021 scores in all UoAs except



Area Studies. Combining the CiteULike with the Mendeley counts to give Total Readers does

not tend to improve on the Mendeley reader count correlation, so Mendeley readers alone

are sufficient. The Altmetric Attention Score (AAS) is a “weighted count of all of the attention

a research output has received” (excluding Mendeley readers), based on volume, source type

and authorship (Altmetric, 2022b). Although Mendeley readers are better indicators of

research quality in most UoAs and substantially better in some medical and physical sciences

fields, AAS is slightly better for a third, mostly from the arts, humanities, and social sciences:

UoAs 6, 7, 14, 20, 22, 23, 25, 28, 30, 31, 34.



Figure 2. Altmetric Scores and online reference manager readers: Spearman correlations with

provisional REF2021 scores, calculated separately for each UoA and year, with the median

across years reported. UoA 29 results have been removed for single figure sample sizes.



Of the news related sources, Tweeters (the number of Twitter users tweeting an article URL,

apparently from a list of academic Tweeters: Altmetric, 2022a) seems to be the best indicator

of research quality (Figure 3). Nevertheless, Blog and news citations (both from curated lists

of sources: Altmetric, 2022a) also have moderate strength as research quality indicators in



many UoAs. Facebook Wall links (from a curated list of walls: Altmetric, 2022a) are the

weakest, presumably due to smaller numbers of academically-relevant walls curated. Twitter

is weaker than Altmetric’s Mendeley readers as a research quality indicator in over three

quarters of UoAs. The exceptions are mostly in the social sciences, arts, and humanities: UoAs

6, 13, 14, 18, 22, 25, 28, 30, 34.

Figure 3. Social network and news sites: Spearman correlations with provisional REF2021

scores, calculated separately for each UoA and year, with the median across years reported.

UoA 29 results have been removed for single figure sample sizes.



Reddit mentions, Wikipedia citations and research highlight reviews (“Recommendations of

individual research outputs from Faculty Opinions”: Altmetric, 2022a) are all weak indicators

of research quality in all fields, presumably for their scarcity. Nevertheless, Wikipedia citations

have a moderate correlation with research quality in Archaeology and perform well compared

to Mendeley Readers and Tweeters in some arts and humanities subjects (Figure 4).



Figure 4. Wikipedia, Reddit and facultyopinions.com research highlight reviews: Spearman

correlations with provisional REF2021 scores, calculated separately for each UoA and year,

with the median across years reported. UoA 29 results have been removed for single figure

sample sizes.


## Discussion


The results are limited by the restriction to the UK and by the articles analysed being self-

selected by academics to be their best work from 2014-20. Thus, the relatively low

proportions of weaker research in the sets used for correlation probably reduces the strength

of the correlations. In particular, there are few low quality 1* articles and the absence of a

substantial proportion of low quality articles that may well score of 0 on all indicators would

reduce all correlations. Conversely, since the UK is a heavy user of social media, including

Mendeley, Twitter and Facebook, it is likely that similar correlations would be lower for most

other countries. The value of altmetrics may also change over time as the demographics of

their users shift. For example, the desktop version of Mendeley started to be phased out in

September 2022 (Shlyuger, 2022), which may lose it some users.

Altmetrics

Except for Mendeley and Twitter, the results above are the first reported altmetric

correlations with research quality scores and so cannot be compared with prior research.

Mendeley correlations are discussed below and Twitter here. Compared to the REF2014


## results from 2008 (HEFCE, 2015), the current results are 7-10 years newer and are more


robust due to taking a median of several years rather than a single year. Even accounting for

this, the Twitter correlations above are surprisingly much stronger than the REF2014

correlations (Tables A54 of: HEFCE, 2015). For 2008, the highest Twitter correlation was 0.23

for Art and Design: History, Practice and Theory, the second highest was 0.17 for Public

Health, Health Services and Primary Care, and the remaining correlations were below 0.15,

with an average of 0.06. This is only a third of the average correlation above (0.18). Thus,

either Altmetric.com’s data collection has become more systematic since 2008 or Twitter has

changed or matured as a scholarly communication platform. The former seems likely because

Altmetric.com was founded in 2011 so its Twitter data for 2008 may well have been

incomplete (Thelwall et al., 2013).

The relatively high correlations for health-related fields may reflect widespread public

interest in potentially impactful medical research (Mohammadi et al., 2018). This increases

the amount of altmetric data but also suggests that the public tends to be interested in higher

quality research to some extent. This is despite public interest in health research being very

topic driven, for example with particular concern for cancer and especially breast cancer

(Lewison et al., 2008).

Mendeley readers vs. Scopus citations

The comparison between Mendeley reader counts and Scopus citation counts above

contrasts sharply with the data available from REF2014 (Tables A39 of: HEFCE, 2015). For the

2008 REF2014 data, the Mendeley correlations were overall 52% of the strength of the Scopus

citation correlations, with Mendeley being stronger in only 5 out of 36 cases. A likely partial

cause of this is Altmetric collecting Mendeley data more systematically now, so its data more

closely reflects Mendeley readers. In addition the first Mendeley results above (Figure 1) use



comprehensive data from the Mendeley API. Altmetric previously harvested data from

Mendeley for articles that it had registered through other altmetrics, so would have missed

some results (Thelwall et al., 2013). Mendeley was launched at the end of 2007 (Henning &

Reichelt, 2008) and needed some time to generate a substantial userbase, but its 2008 data

nevertheless seems to be as substantial as its later data (Thelwall & Sud, 2016). Thus, probably

because of incomplete early Altmetric Mendeley data, the HEFCE analysis seems to have

underestimated the value of Mendeley as a research quality indicator. The current results

suggest that in most fields outside the arts and humanities it is similar in strength to citation

counts in this role, although usually a little weaker.



An exception to the above conclusion is that a previous study claimed that Mendeley

readers were as useful in the arts and humanities as elsewhere (Thelwall, 2019). The above


## results suggest that this is false because Mendeley is of little use in the arts and humanities


as a quality indicator. It is even substantially less useful than citations, which are themselves

very weak research quality indicators.

Field normalisation

The comparison between raw Scopus citation counts and field normalised NLCS versions

above echo the data available from REF2014, although this was not analysed in the report

(Tables A3, A8 of: HEFCE, 2015). For REF2014, Scopus’s Field Weighted Citation Impact (FWCI),

which is similar to the NLCS above except without the log transformation component (Scopus,

2020), had a stronger correlation with REF2014 final scores for 2008 articles than did raw

citation counts in only a third of UoAs (12 out of 36). Thus, similar results for two different

field normalised datasets suggest that field normalisation of citation counts is not helpful

when comparing articles within the same field, at least when using Scopus narrow fields for

normalisation.


## Conclusions


In answer to the first research question, the Altmetric.com altmetrics that are most useful as

indicators of research quality are, in descending order, Mendeley readers, Tweeters,

Facebook Walls, News, Blogs, Wikipedia, Reddit and Research Highlights. Of these Mendeley

is close to Scopus citations in power as a research quality indicator, and Tweeters is clearly

the best of the social web indicators. The last three only have minor value. The evidence is

the strongest yet for Mendeley and Twitter and is the first of its kind for the others. The results

support the continued use of altmetrics as attention indicators by publishers even though the

evidence for some is weak. They particularly strengthen the case for the value of Twitter for

altmetrics. Doubt had been previously cast on it due to Twitter’s use for publicity and spam,

but the current results suggest that these uses have either declined, been filtered out by

Altmetric.com, or naturally align with the quality of articles. In terms of field differences,

altmetrics have the most value in health fields, and the physical sciences and the least value

in the arts and humanities.



In answer to the second research question, the proprietary but well known Altmetric

Attention Score seems to be an effective quality indicator even though it is designed to reflect

attention rather than research quality or impact. This result has the practical implication that

it is a reasonable value for researchers to consult informally, especially in the health and

physical sciences.



For the third research question, none of the altmetrics are as effective as citation

counts as research quality indicators, despite Mendeley being a close second. It is reasonable



to continue to use Mendeley readers as a substitute for citations as an early impact or quality

indicator when the citation window is too narrow for citations, however.



Finally, an accidental by-product of this research was the unexpected finding that field

normalising citations using Scopus narrow fields reduces their value as research quality

indicators, presumably due to problems with the field classifications used. Thus, research

evaluators should consider avoiding field normalisation when a set of articles to be evaluated

are mainly from a single broad field. Alternatively, a more consistent field categorisation

scheme might be used (Klavans & Boyack, 2017), if available.

Acknowledgements

This study was funded by Research England, Scottish Funding Council, Higher Education

Funding Council for Wales, and Department for the Economy, Northern Ireland. The content

is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views

of the funders.


## References


Akella, A. P., Alhoori, H., Kondamudi, P. R., Freeman, C., & Zhou, H. (2021). Early indicators of

scientific impact: Predicting citations with altmetrics. Journal of Informetrics, 15(2),

101128.

Altmetric (2022a). Our sources. https://www.altmetric.com/about-our-data/our-sources-2/

Altmetric

(2022b).

The

donut

and

Altmetric

Attention

Score.

https://www.altmetric.com/about-our-data/the-donut-and-score/

Aung, H. H., Zheng, H., Erdt, M., Aw, A. S., Sin, S. C. J., & Theng, Y. L. (2019). Investigating

familiarity and usage of traditional metrics and altmetrics. Journal of the Association for

Information Science and Technology, 70(8), 872-887.

Bar‐Ilan, J., Haustein, S., Milojević, S., Peters, I., & Wolfram, D. (2018). Peer review,

bibliometrics and altmetrics‐Do we need them all? Proceedings of the Association for

Information Science and Technology, 55, 653-656.

Costas, R., Zahedi, Z., & Wouters, P. (2015). Do “altmetrics” correlate with citations? Extensive

comparison of altmetric indicators with citations from a multidisciplinary perspective.

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66(10), 2003-2019.

Haustein, S., Larivière, V., Thelwall, M., Amyot, D., & Peters, I. (2014a). Tweets vs. Mendeley

readers: How do these two social media metrics differ?  IT - Information Technology,

56(5), 207-215.

Haustein, S., Peters, I., Sugimoto, C., Thelwall M., & Larivière, V. (2014b). Tweeting

biomedicine: An analysis of tweets and citations in the biomedical literature. Journal of

the Association for Information Science and Technology, 65(4), 656–669.

Haustein, S., Peters, I., Bar-Ilan, J., Priem, J., Shema, H., & Terliesner, J. (2014c). Coverage and

adoption of altmetrics sources in the bibliometric community. Scientometrics, 101(2),

1145-1163.

HEFCE (2015). The Metric Tide: Correlation analysis of REF2014 scores and metrics

(Supplementary Report II to the independent Review of the Role of Metrics in Research

Assessment and Management). Higher Education Funding Council for England.

https://www.ukri.org/publications/review-of-metrics-in-research-assessment-and-

management/



Henning, V., & Reichelt, J. (2008). Mendeley: a last.fm for research? In: 2008 IEEE fourth

international conference on eScience (pp. 327-328). Los Alamitos: IEEE Press.

Holmberg, K., & Thelwall, M. (2014). Disciplinary differences in Twitter scholarly

communication. Scientometrics, 101(2), 1027-1042.

Klavans, R., & Boyack, K. W. (2017). Which type of citation analysis generates the most

accurate taxonomy of scientific and technical knowledge? Journal of the Association for

Information Science and Technology, 68(4), 984-998.

Kousha, K. (2019). Web citation indicators for wider impact assessment of articles. Springer

handbook of science and technology indicators. Berlin: Springer (pp. 801-818).

Langfeldt, L., Nedeva, M., Sörlin, S., & Thomas, D. A. (2020). Co-existing notions of research

quality: A framework to study context-specific understandings of good research.

Minerva, 58(1), 115-137.

Lemke, S., Brede, M., Rotgeri, S., & Peters, I. (2022). Research articles promoted in embargo

e-mails receive higher citations and altmetrics. Scientometrics, 127(1), 75-97.

Lewison, G., Tootell, S., Roe, P., & Sullivan, R. (2008). How do the media report cancer

research? A study of the UK's BBC website. British Journal of Cancer, 99(4), 569-576.

Mohammadi, E., Thelwall, M., Kwasny, M., & Holmes, K. (2018). Academic information on

Twitter:

A

user

survey.

PLOS

ONE,

13(5):

e0197265.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0197265

Moed, H. F. (2006). Citation analysis in research evaluation. Berlin, Germany: Springer.

Ortega, J. L. (2018). Reliability and accuracy of altmetric providers: a comparison among

Altmetric. com, PlumX and Crossref Event Data. Scientometrics, 116(3), 2123-2138.

Peters, I., Kraker, P., Lex, E., Gumpenberger, C., & Gorraiz, J. (2016). Research data explored:

an extended analysis of citations and altmetrics. Scientometrics, 107(2), 723-744.

Priem, J., Taraborelli, D., Groth, P., & Neylon, C. (2011). Altmetrics: A manifesto.

http://altmetrics.org/manifesto/

REF2021 (2021). Guide to the REF results. https://ref.ac.uk/guidance-on-results/guidance-on-

ref-2021-results/

Robinson-García, N., Torres-Salinas, D., Zahedi, Z., & Costas, R. (2014). New data, new

possibilities: Exploring the insides of altmetric.com. Profesional de la Información,

23(4). http://www.elprofesionaldelainformacion.com/contenidos/2014/julio/03.pdf

Roemer, R. C., & Borchardt, R. (2015). Issues, controversies, and opportunities for altmetrics.

Library Technology Reports, 51(5), 20-30.

Scopus

(2020).

What

is

Field-weighted

Citation

Impact

(FWCI)?

https://service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/14894/supporthub/scopus/

Scopus

(2022).

Content

–

How

Scopus

works.

https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/how-scopus-works/content

Shlyuger, D. (2022). Introducing Mendeley Reference Manager – designed for today’s

researcher workflow. https://blog.mendeley.com/2022/02/22/introducing-mendeley-


## reference-manager-designed-for-todays-researcher-workflow/


Sud, P. & Thelwall, M. (2014). Evaluating altmetrics. Scientometrics, 98(2), 1131-1143.

Thelwall, M. (2016). Interpreting correlations between citation counts and other indicators.

Scientometrics, 108(1), 337-347. doi:10.1007/s11192-016-1973-7

Thelwall, M. (2017). Three practical field normalised alternative indicator formulae for

research evaluation. Journal of Informetrics, 11(1), 128–151. 10.1016/j.joi.2016.12.002

Thelwall, M. (2019). Do Mendeley reader counts indicate the value of arts and humanities

research? Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 51(3), 781-788.



Thelwall, M., Haustein, S., Larivière, V. & Sugimoto, C. (2013). Do altmetrics work? Twitter

and

ten

other

candidates.

PLOS

ONE,

8(5),

e64841.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064841

Thelwall, M. & Sud, P. (2016). Mendeley readership counts: An investigation of temporal and

disciplinary differences. Journal of the Association for Information Science and

Technology, 57(6), 3036-3050. doi:10.1002/asi.23559

Thelwall, M. & Nevill, T. (2018). Could scientists use Altmetric.com scores to predict longer

term citation counts? Journal of Informetrics, 12(1), 237-248.

Thelwall, M. & Wilson, P. (2016). Mendeley readership altmetrics for medical articles: An


## analysis of 45 fields. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology,


67(8), 1962-1972. doi:10.1002/asi.23501

Waltman, L., van Eck, N. J., van Leeuwen, T. N., Visser, M. S., & van Raan, A. F. (2011). Towards

a new crown indicator: An empirical analysis. Scientometrics, 87(3), 467-481.

Wang, J. (2013). Citation time window choice for research impact evaluation. Scientometrics,

94(3), 851-872.

Wouters, P., & Costas, R. (2012). Users, narcissism and control: tracking the impact of

scholarly

publications

in

the

21st

century.

https://www.academia.edu/download/46604436/Users_Narcissism_and_ControlTrac

king_the20160618-29618-1krd30v.pdf

Zahedi, Z., Costas, R., & Wouters, P. (2017). Mendeley readership as a filtering tool to identify

highly cited publications. Journal of the Association for Information Science and

Technology, 68(10), 2511-2521.